Title: The Adventures of Ulysses the Wanderer

Author: Cyril Arthur Edward Ranger Gull

Illustrator: W. G. Mein

Release Date: January 28, 2013 [EBook #41935]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                 THE
        ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES
            _THE WANDERER_


        An Old Story Retold by
            C. RANGER-GULL

              AUTHOR OF
   "THE HYPOCRITE," "FROM THE BOOK
  BEAUTIFUL," "BACK TO LILAC LAND,"
                 ETC.


             Illustrated
                  BY
              W. G. MEIN


                London
      GREENING AND COMPANY, LTD.
  20 CECIL COURT, CHARING CROSS ROAD
                 1902




    BY THE SAME AUTHOR

    THE HYPOCRITE.
      Seventh Edition. 2s. 6d.

    BACK TO LILAC LAND.
      Second Edition. 6s.

    MISS MALEVOLENT.
      Second Edition. 3s. 6d.

    THE CIGARETTE SMOKER.
      Second Edition. 2s. 6d.

    FROM THE BOOK BEAUTIFUL.
      Being Old Lights Re-lit. 3s. 6d.


    IN PREPARATION.

    THE SERF. A Tale of the Times of
      King Stephen.

    HIS GRACE'S GRACE. A Story
      of Oxford Life.




    [Illustration: HE STARED STEADILY AT THEM WITH HIS SINGLE EYE
      FOR A FULL MINUTE.
        _Page 32._
        _Frontispiece._]




    TO

    HERBERT BEERBOHM TREE

    IN APPRECIATION OF HIS SCHOLARSHIP
    IN ADMIRATION OF HIS ART
    TO ONE OF THE FEW GREAT ARTISTS
    WHO HAS NEVER BEEN UNTRUE
    TO THE HIGHEST IDEALS OF HIS CALLING
    AND IN SPECIAL MEMORY
    OF THE FIRST NIGHT OF "HAMLET"
    AT MANCHESTER




CONTENTS


                                                        PAGE
    Foreword                                               9

    Brief Account of Principal Characters
      in the Odyssey                                      13

    The First Episode--How They blinded the
      Son of Poseidon                                     21

    The Second Episode--The Adventure of
      the Palace in the Wood                              39

    The Third Episode--How Ulysses walked
      in Hell, and of the Adventure of
      the Sirens and Scylla                               48

    The Fourth Episode--How Ulysses lost
      his Merry Men and came a Waif to
      Calypso with the Shining Hair                       63

    The Last Episode--How the King came
      Home again after the Long Years                     80

    A Note on Homer and Ulysses                           98




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


    HE STARED STEADILY AT THEM WITH HIS
      SINGLE EYE FOR A FULL MINUTE            _Frontispiece_

    THEN HE CAME SWIFTLY UPON THE
      GLEAMING PALACE                       _facing page_ 45

    THEN HE WAS, IN AN INSTANT MOMENT,
      AWARE OF A MORE THAN MORTAL PRESENCE        "       49

    THEY CAME TO THE BRINK OF THE RIVER           "       52

    "WHO AM I THAT I CAN COMBAT THE
      WILL OF ZEUS OR THE HARDNESS OF
      YOUR HEART?"                                "       78

    "NAY, IF YOU LOVE ME," HE SAID, "NONE
      OF THAT, MY FRIEND"                         "       83




FOREWORD


Seven fair and illustrious cities of the dim, ancient world, Argos,
Athenæ, Chios, Colophon, Salamis, Rhodos, Smyrna, fought a war of
words over HOMER'S birthplace.

Each claimed the honour.

And if, indeed, such an accident of chance confers an honour upon a
town, then the birthplace of the Greatest Poet of all time should be a
place of pilgrimage.

For, among the weavers of Epos, Drama, and Romance, he who was called
Melesegenes is first of all and wears an imperishable crown.

For 3000 years his fame has streamed down the ages.

The world has changed. Great empires have risen, flowered and passed.
Christianity came, flooding mankind with light, at a time when, though
Homer was a dim tradition, his work was a living force in the world.
When Christ was born, Homerus was dead 900 years.

A man with such immensity of glory ceases to be a man. He becomes a
Force.

Of the two imperishable monuments Homer has left us, the decision of
critical scholarship has placed the _Iliad_ first. It has been said
that the _Iliad_ is like the midday, the _Odyssey_ like the setting
sun. Both are of equal splendour, though the latter has lost its
noonday heat.

But I would take that adroit simile and draw another meaning from it.

When deferred, expected night at last approaches, when the sun paints
the weary west with faëry pictures of glowing seas, of golden islands
hanging in the sky, of lonely magic waterways unsailed by mortal
keels; then, indeed, there comes into the heart and brain another
warmth,--the mysterious quickening of Romance.

For I think that the ringing sound of arms, the vibrant thriddings of
bows, the clash of heroes, are far less wonderful than the long,
lonely wanderings of Ulysses.

Through all the _Odyssey_ the winds are blowing, the seas moaning, and
the estranged sad spectres of the night flit noiselessly across the
printed page.

Through new lands, among new peoples--friends and foes--touching at
green islands set like emeralds in wine-coloured seas, the immortal
mariner moves to the music of his creator's verse. The Sirens' voices,
the Fairy's enchanted wine, the Twin Monsters of the Strait pass and
are forgotten.

His wife's tears bid him ever towards home.

I sometimes have wondered if Vergil thought of Ulysses when he made
his own lesser wanderer say:--

    "Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum,
    Tendimus in Latium, sedes ubi fata quietas
    Ostendunt."

And now, since we are to have, on that so magical a stage, a concrete
picture: since we are to take away another storied memory from beneath
the copper dome, I feel that the story of Ulysses may once more be
told in English.

A fine poet, a great player, are to give us an Ulysses who must
perforce be not only full of the spirit of his own age of myth, but
instinct with the spirit of this.

That is as inevitable as it is interesting.

The "Gentle Elia" (how one wishes one could find a better name for
him--but custom makes cowards of us all) has written his own version
of the _Odyssey_. I cannot emulate that. But I think I can at least be
useful.

There are three stages of knowing Homer: the time when one dog's ears
and dogrells him at school, the time when one loves him, a literary
love! at Oxford, and the time when the _va et vient_ of life in great
capitals wakes the dormant Ulysses in the heart of every artist, and
he begins to understand.

    "The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep
    Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
    'Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
    Push off, and sitting well in order smite
    The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
    To sail beyond the sunset----"

                                           _C. RANGER-GULL._




A BRIEF ACCOUNT

OF THE

PRINCIPAL CHARACTERS IN THE WANDERINGS OF ULYSSES, ACCORDING TO THE
ANCIENT WRITERS AND LEGENDS.


ULYSSES. The hero of Homer's great poem was known to the Greeks under
the name of Odysseus. He was king of the pastoral islands of Ithaca
and Dulichium. Most of the petty Greek chieftains became suitors for
the hand of the beautiful Helen, and Ulysses was among the number, but
withdrew when he realised the smallness of his chances. He then
married Penelope, the daughter of Icarius, and at the same time joined
with the other unsuccessful lovers of Helen in a sworn league for her
future protection should she ever stand in need of it. He then
returned to Ithaca with his bride. The rape of Helen soon compelled
him to leave Penelope and join the other Grecian princes in the great
war against Troy. He endeavoured to avoid the summons by pretending
madness. Yoking a horse and a bull together, he began to plough the
sands of the sea shore. The messenger who was sent to him took
Telemachus, the infant son of Ulysses, and placed the child in the
direct course of the plough, in this way circumventing his design.
Ulysses was one of the most prominent figures during the Trojan war,
his valour, and still more his cunning, making him of supreme
importance in the councils of the princes. After the Trojan war
Ulysses set sail for home, and at this period of his career the story
of the _Odyssey_ begins. He was driven by malevolent winds on to the
shores of Africa, where he and his mariners were captured by the
one-eyed giant, Polyphemus, who ate five of the band. Ulysses escaped
by thrusting a stake into the giant's eye and then leaving the cave in
which he was confined by crawling under the bellies of the sheep when
the Cyclops led them to pasture. He next arrives at Æolia, and Æolus
gave him, imprisoned in bags, all the evil winds which were likely to
obstruct his safe return homewards. The sailors, curious to know what
the bags contained, opened them, and the imprisoned winds, rushing out
with fearful violence, destroyed the whole fleet save only the vessel
which bore Ulysses. The ship was thrown on the shores of the Goddess
Circe's enchanted island, and the companions of Ulysses were changed
into swine by the enchantress. Ulysses escaped the like fate by means
of a magic herb he had received from Mercury, and forced the goddess
to bring his friends to their original shape. He then yielded to her
solicitations and made her the mother of Telegonus. The next stage of
his adventures brings him to Hades, where he goes to consult the shade
of the wise Tiresias as to the means of reaching home in safety. He
passes the terrible coasts of the Sirens unhurt, and escaped the
monsters Scylla and Charybdis by a series of narrow chances. In Sicily
his sailors, urged by extreme hunger, killed some of Apollo's cattle,
and the Sun-God in revenge destroyed all his companions and also his
ship. Ulysses alone escaped on a raft and swam to the shores of an
island belonging to Calypso, with whom he lived a lotos life as
husband for seven years. The gods eventually interfered, and Ulysses,
once more properly equipped, set out on his travels again. However,
Neptune (Poseidon), the lord of the sea, still remembered the injury
done to his son, the giant Polyphemus, and wrecked this ship also.
Ulysses was cast up on the island of the Phoeacians, where he was
hospitably received by King Alcinous and his daughter the Princess
Nausicaa, and at last sent home in safety to his own kingdom after an
absence of more than twenty years. The Goddess Athene befriended him,
and informed him that his palace was crowded with debauched and
insolent suitors for the hand of Queen Penelope, but that his wife was
still faithful and unceasingly mourned his loss. Adopting the advice
of the goddess, he disguised himself in rags to see for himself the
state of his home. He then slew the suitors and lived quietly at home
for the remaining sixteen years of his adventurous life. Tradition
says that he at last met his death at the hands of his illegitimate
son Telegonus.


PENELOPE. A famous Græcian princess, wife of Ulysses. She married at
about the same time that Helen wedded King Menelaus, and returned home
to Ithaca with her husband against the wishes of her father Icarius of
Sparta. During the long absence of Ulysses she was besieged by suitors
for her hand, who established themselves in the palace. She became
practically their prisoner, and was compelled to dissimulate and put
them off by various excuses. She managed to keep her importunate
guests in some sort of good humour by giving out that she would make a
choice among them as soon as she had completed a piece of tapestry on
which she was engaged. Each night she undid the stitches she had
worked in the daytime. On the return of Ulysses she was, of course,
freed from the suitors by her husband. According to some ancient
writers, after the death of Ulysses she married Telegonus, Ulysses'
son by the Goddess Circe. Her name Penelope sprung from some
river-birds who were called "Penelopes."


TELEMACHUS. The son of Ulysses and Penelope. When his father left for
the Trojan war Telemachus was but an infant, but at the close of the
campaign he went to seek him and to obtain what information he could
about his father's absence. When Ulysses returned home in disguise
Athene brought son and parent together, and the two concerted means to
rid the palace of the suitors. After the death of Ulysses, Telemachus
is said to have gone to the island of Circe and married the
enchantress, formerly his father's mistress. A son called Latinus
sprung from this union.


ATHENE (Minerva). The Goddess of Wisdom was born from Zeus' brain
without a mother. She sprang from his head in full armour. She was the
most powerful of the goddesses and the friend of mankind. She was the
patroness of Ulysses, and it was believed she first invented ships.
Her chastity was inviolable. Her worship was universal.


ZEUS (Jupiter). Chief of all the gods. His attitude towards Ulysses
was friendly owing to the persuasion of his daughter Athene.


POSEIDON (Neptune) was the Sea God and next in power to Zeus. He was
the father of the giant Polyphemus whom Ulysses blinded, and is the
consistent enemy of Ulysses throughout the whole _Odyssey_. Neptune
was the brother of Zeus.


HERMES (Mercury) was the messenger of the gods and a son of Zeus. He
was especially the patron of travellers and well disposed to Ulysses.


TIRESIAS was in life a celebrated soothsayer and philosopher of
Thebes. His wisdom was universal. Having inadvertently seen the
Goddess Athene bathing in the fountain of Hippocrene, he was blinded.
Ulysses visited his spirit in Hades, in order to obtain his advice as
to the journey homewards to Ithaca.


CIRCE. An enchantress celebrated for her knowledge of the magic
properties of herbs. She was of extreme personal beauty. In girlhood
she married the prince of Colchis, whom she murdered to obtain his
kingdom. She was thereon banished to the fairy island of Ææa. When
Ulysses visited her shores she changed his companions into swine, but
Ulysses was protected by the magic virtues of a herb called _moly_.
Ulysses spent a year in the arms of Circe, and she gave birth to a son
called Telegonus.


CALYPSO. One of the daughters of Atlas, was known as the
"bright-haired Goddess of Silence," and was queen of the lost island
of Ogygia. Ulysses spent seven years with her, and she bore him two
sons. By order of Zeus, Hermes was sent to the island ordering Ulysses
to leave his voluptuous sloth, and Calypso, who was inconsolable at
his loss, was forced to allow him to depart. The legend runs that the
goddess offered him the gift of immortality if he would remain with
her.


SCYLLA and CHARYBDIS. Scylla was a terrible female monster who
devoured six of Ulysses' crew, though the hero himself escaped her.
Below the waist she was composed of creatures like dogs who never
ceased barking. She was supported by twelve feet and had six different
heads. The monster dwelt in a cave under the sea on one side of a
narrow strait off the coast of Sicily. On the other side of the strait
was the great whirlpool CHARYBDIS. It was invested with a personality
by Homer, and Charybdis was said to be a giantess who sucked down
ships as they passed.


THE SIRENS. Monsters with sweet alluring voices who inhabited a small
island near Sicily. They had bodies like great birds, according to
some writers, with the heads of beautiful women. Whosoever heard their
magic song must go to them and remain with them for ever. Ulysses
escaped the enchantment by causing himself to be bound to the ship's
mast.


POLYPHEMUS. The son of Poseidon. He was the giant king of the
Cyclopes who were workers in the forge of Vulcan and made armour for
the gods. Ulysses and his companions blinded him in order to escape
from the cavern where he had imprisoned them.


ANTINOUS. A native gentleman of Ithaca, one of Penelope's most
persistent suitors. When Ulysses came home disguised as a beggar
Antinous struck him. He was the first to fall by Ulysses' bow.


EURYCLEA. The nurse of Ulysses in his infancy, and one of the first to
recognise him on his return from his wanderings. She was in her youth
the lovely daughter of Ops of Ithaca.


EUMÆUS. The herdsman and steward of Ulysses who knew his master on his
return after an absence of twenty years. He was the king's right-hand
man in the plot against, and fight with, the suitors of Penelope.




THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES




THE FIRST EPISODE

HOW THEY BLINDED THE SON OF POSEIDON


A warm mild wind, laden with sweet scents, blew over the sailors from
the island, which now lay far astern.

In the weary west the charmed sunset still lingered over Lotus Land.

A rosy flush lay on the snow-capped mountains which were yet spectral
in the last lights of the day, but looking out over the bows the sky
was dark purple changing into black, and where it met the sea there
was a white gleam of foam.

The companions of Ulysses sat idle from the oars, for the wind filled
the belly of the sail and there was no need for rowing. A curious
silence brooded over them all. No one spoke to his fellow. The faces
of all were sad, and in the eyes of some the fire of an unutterable
regret burnt steadily.

The heads of all were turned towards the island, which was fast
disappearing from their view. Some of the men shaded their eyes with
their hands in one last long look of farewell.

As the curtain of the dark fell upon the sea, the warm offshore wind
died away. A colder breeze, full of the sea-smell itself, came down
over the port bow; it moaned through the cordage, and little waves
began to hiss under the cutwater.

Every now and again the wind freshened rapidly. The mournful whistling
became a sudden snarling of trumpets. The ship and crew seemed to have
passed over the limits of a tableau. Not only was it a quick elemental
change of scene, but the change had its influence with the spectators.

The sad fire--if the glow of regret is indeed a fire--died out of
heavy eyes half veiled by weary lids. The sea-light dawned once more
upon the faces of the mariners, the bright warm blood moved swiftly in
their veins.

One man ran to the steering oar to give an aid to the helmsman as the
ship went about on the starboard tack, three more stood by the sheet,
a hum of talk rose from the waist of the boat. Ulysses stood in the
bows looking forward into the night. His tall, lean figure was bent
forward, and his arm was thrown round the gilded boss of the prow. His
eyes were deep set in his head, and his brow was furrowed with the
innumerable wrinkles which come to the man who lives a life of
hardship and striving.

Yet the long years of battle and wandering, a life of shocks! had only
intensified the alertness of his pose. He seemed, as he looked out
into the night, a personification of "readiness." A crisp dark beard
grew round his throat, and the veins on his bare brown arms were like
blue enamel round a column of bronze.

When the ship went about again he came down into the body of the ship
and helped to pull upon the brace. Though he was no taller than many
of his men, and leaner than most, in physical strength as well as in
intellect he was first and chief. The mighty muscles leapt up on his
arms as he strained on the taut rope.

The ship slanted away down the wind into the night. The men gathered
round their captain. "Comrades," he said to them in a singularly sweet
and musical voice, "once more we adventure the deep, and no man knows
what shall befall us. To our island home in the west, to dear Ithaca!
if the gods so will it. Our wives weep for us on our deserted
hearthstone. Our little ones are noble youths ere now, and may Zeus
bring us safe home at last. Yet much it misdoubts me that there are
other perils in store for us ere we hear the long breakers beat upon
the shores of Ithaca and see the morning sun run down the wooded sides
of Neriton. Be that as the Fates will it, let us keep always courage,
gaiety, and the quiet mind."

"We are well away from there," said one of the men, nodding vaguely
towards the stern.

"That are we," said another; "that cursed fruit is honeysweet in my
mouth still. It stole away our brains and made us as women, we! the
men who fought in Troyland."

"Of what profit is it to look to the past, Phocion?" said Ulysses. "We
did eat and sleep and forget, but it is over. The sea wind is salt
once more upon our faces. Let us eat the night meal, and then I will
choose a watch and the rest may sleep. Hand me the cup--To to-morrow's
dawn!"

Then one of the sailors took dried goat's flesh and fruit from a
locker in the stern, and by the light of a torch of sawn sandal wood
they fell to eating. Great bunches of purple grapes lay before each
sailor, but they had brought none of the magic lotus fruit with them
to steal away their vigour and thicken their blood.

Then they lay down to sleep under coverings of skins. Two men went to
the great steering oar, three men watched amidship by the braces, and
Ulysses himself wrapped a woollen cloak round him and went once more
into the bows.

Alone there with the wind his thoughts once more went back to his far
distant home. He thought with longing of his old father Laertes, of
the child Telemachus playing in the marble courtyard of the sunny
palace on the hill. A deep sigh shuddered out from his lips as his
thoughts fell upon the lonely Queen Penelope. "Wife of mine," he
thought, "shall I ever lie beside you more? Is there silver in your
bright hair now? Are your thoughts to mewards as mine to you?
Perchance another rules in my palace and sits at my seat. Are your
lips another's now? The great tears are blinding me. Courage!"

Bending his head upon his breast, Ulysses prayed long and earnestly to
his awful patroness, the Goddess Athene, that she would still keep
ward over his fortunes and guide him safely home.

The night wore on and became very silent. The ship seemed to be
moving swiftly and surely, though the wind had dropped and the voice
of the waves was hushed. It seemed to the watcher in the bows that the
ship was moving in the path of some strong current.

A curious white mist suddenly rolled over the still surface of the
sea, thick and ghostly. The mast and sail, which was now drooping and
lifeless, swayed through it like giant spectres. Ulysses could see
none of his companions, but when he hailed the watch the voice of
Phocion came back to him through the ghostly curtain, curiously thick
and muffled.

"The mist thickens, my captain," said the sailor. "Can you see aught
ahead?"

"I can see nothing, Phocion," shouted Ulysses; "the mist is like wool.
But I think it is a land mist come out to meet us. There should be
land ahead."

"I hear no surf or the rolling of waves," said Phocion. "May Zeus
guide the boat, for mortal men are of no avail to-night."

The ship moved on swiftly as if guided by invisible hands towards some
goal, and still the expectant mariners heard no sound.

Quite suddenly, and without the slightest warning, a vivid
copper-coloured flash of lightning illuminated the ship. For an
instant in the hard lurid light Ulysses saw the whole of the vessel in
a distinct picture.

Every detail was manifest--the mast, the cordage, the sleeping
sailors below, the watching group by the shrouds, and, right away
astern, the startled helmsmen motionless as statues of bronze.

Then with a long grinding noise the ship seemed suddenly lifted up in
the water, jerked forward, and then dropped again. She began to heel
over a little out of the perpendicular, and then remained still,
stranded upon an unknown and mysterious shore, where the waves were
all asleep. Still the white mist circled round them.

"Comrades," said Ulysses, "we are brought here by no chance of wind
and waves. Some god has done this thing, but whether for weal or woe I
cannot tell. Let us land upon the beach and lie down with our weapons
within sound of the sea till dawn. At sunrise we shall know where the
god has brought us."

They landed at the order, and with the supreme indifference of the
adventurer lay upon the shore and slept out the remainder of the
night. But Ulysses had a prescience of harm, and was full of sinister
forebodings. He did not sleep, but paced through the mist all night in
a little beaten track among the boulders. He prayed long and earnestly
to Athene.

When the first faint hintings of dawn brightened through the mist a
little breeze arose, and before the sky was more than faintly flushed
with day the night fog was blown away like thistledown.

As the sun climbed up the sky the companions found that they had been
carried to a scene of singular beauty. They were on an island, a
small, rich place at the mouth of a great bay. Rich level grass
meadows, green as bright enamel and brilliant with flowers, sloped
gently down to the violet sea. Behind was a thickly-wooded hill, at
the foot of which was a sparkling spring surrounded by a tall grove of
poplar trees.

In the leafy wood the wild goats leapt under the wild vine trees like
Pan at play, as fearless of the intruders as if they had never seen
men before. All the bright morning the sailors made the wood ring with
happy laughter as they speared the goats for a feast. All trouble
passed from their minds, and as the spears flashed swiftly through the
green wood the shrill, jocund voices of the hunters made all the
island musical. Ulysses plunged into a translucent pool at the foot of
the spring, and the cool water flashed like diamonds over his strong
brown arms, and he looked indeed as if he were some river-god and this
his fairy home.

All day long they feasted and drank wine which they had brought in
skins from Lotus Land. When night was falling, very still and gentle,
they saw the blue smoke of fires over the bay, on the mainland, about
a mile away, and the bleating of many sheep and the lowing of herds
came to them over the wine-coloured sea.

Ever and again voices could be heard--strange resonant voices. "That
must be the country of some strange gods," the sailors said to each
other. "Those are no mortal voices. We are come into some great
peril." Before they slept they sacrificed a goat on the seashore to
Zeus, that he might guard them from any coming harm.

In the morning the king prepared for action. It was necessary to find
upon what shores they had arrived, to get direction of Ithaca, and if
treasure was to be won by force or guile, to take the opportunity
which chance or the gods had sent.

Ulysses chose twelve of his men, tried veterans with nerves of steel,
old comrades who had fought with him for Helen on the windy plains of
Troy. With these old never-strikes he embarked on the ship. He left
Phocion as leader of the remainder of the crew, and taking Elpenor
with him as second in command, they got out six sweeps, three on each
side of the ship, and rowed slowly over the glassy bay.

The mainland, on the shore where they landed, was a wild rocky place,
and there was a broad road winding away up to the higher pasture
lands. The road was made of great rocks beaten into smoothness, and
fresh spoor of cattle showed that not long since a great herd had
passed to the upland feeding grounds.

Directly in front of them as they landed was a high cave. It was
fringed with laurel bushes, which grew on ledges in the cliff side.

Before the cave a great wall had been built in a square, forming a
courtyard. The wall was built with enormous masses of rock, and fenced
with a palisade of pine trunks and massive boles of oak. There was no
sign of any living thing. Slowly and cautiously the party crept up to
the wall. Their weapons were in readiness as they stole through the
gateway. Within the square formed by the wall they could see that it
was a vast cattle pen. "This must be the dwelling of some giant," said
Elpenor; "men do not build like this. On what strange place have we
chanced?" He looked inquiringly at Ulysses when he had spoken, and a
ring of eager faces turned towards him whose wisdom was never at
fault, the favourite of Athene.

"I think, comrades," said Ulysses, "that we have been driven to the
shores of the Cyclopes. They are mighty giants, who work in the forge
of Vulcan making armour for the gods. Now this cave must be the
dwelling of one of them, and I like not where we are. Let us but go
within for a short time and take what we can find, and then hasten
back to the island. The Cyclopes have no boats and cannot follow us.
But it would go hard with us were we found, for they are crafty and
cruel monsters."

With hasty, curious footsteps they crossed the echoing flags of the
courtyard and entered the cave. As the shadow of the entrance fell
upon them and the chill of the air inside struck on their faces, more
than one would have gladly stayed in the warm outside sunshine. It was
an ill-omened, sinister place this lair of giants.

A pungent ammoniacal smell made them cough and shudder as they crossed
the threshold. Ulysses turned with a grim smile to his followers.
"Thank the gods we are seamen and sons of the fresh wind. This Cyclops
lives like a swine in a stye." The large entrance to the cave gave a
fair light within, and their eyes soon became accustomed to it. Along
one side of the cave were folds of fat lambs and kids who bleated
lustily at them. At the end of the cave was a great couch of skins by
the ashes of a pine fire. Bones and scraps of flesh were piled round,
relics of some great orgy, and a sickly stench of decay came from the
_débris_.

Piles of wicker baskets were loaded with huge yellow cheeses, and
there were many copper milk pails and bowls brimful of whey.

The sailors rejoiced at such an abundance of good cheer, and they
killed one of the fattest of the lambs and lit a fire to roast it.

"The giant will not return till even," said Elpenor, "and by then we
shall be far away. We will make a good meal now, and then load the
ship with cheeses and drive off the best of the lambs. Our comrades
will welcome us home this night, for we shall be full-handed!"

So, careless of danger, they sat them down in that perilous place and
made merry on the giant's cheer. They had brought skins of wine with
them, and they drank in mockery to their absent host.

In the middle of the feast one of the men suddenly laid down his cup.
"Hearken," he said uneasily, "do you hear anything, friends?"

"I hear nothing," said Ulysses. "What sound did you hear?"

"A distant sound, I thought," answered the man, "as if the earth
shook."

"There is nothing," said a third at length; but a certain constraint
fell upon them all, and anxiety clouded their faces.

"Let us begone," said Ulysses at length. "There is what I do not like
in the air. I fear evil."

He had but hardly made an end of speaking when all of them there were
struck rigid with apprehension. A distant but rapidly-nearing sound
assailed their ears, a heavy crunching sound like the blows of a great
hammer upon the earth, save that each succeeding blow was louder than
the last. They stood irresolute for one fatal moment, and then started
to run towards the mouth of the cave.

The noise filled all the air, which hummed and trembled with it. They
reached the entrance, but too late. Even as the first man came out
into the afternoon sunlight, a great herd of cattle came pouring into
the courtyard. Behind them, towering over the wall, as tall as the
tallest pine on the slopes of Hymettus, strode Polyphemus, the giant
king of the Cyclopes, son of the God Poseidon.

The giant was naked to the waist, where he wore a girdle of skins. One
great eye burned in the centre of his forehead, and a row of sharp,
white teeth were framed by thick dribbling lips, like the lips of a
cow.

Under his arm Polyphemus carried a bundle of young sapling trees,
which he had brought for faggots for his fire. He threw them on the
floor of the courtyard by the mouth of the cave with a great crash.
The adventurers crouched away at the back of the cave in the darkness
as the giant entered.

He drove all the ewes of his flock before him, leaving the rams
outside in the court. Then he took a great hole of rock, which scarce
twenty teams of horses could have moved, and closed the mouth of the
cave.

With a great sigh of weariness, which echoed like a hissing wind and
blew the silent bats which hung to the roof this way and that in a
frightened eddy of wings, he sank down upon his couch of skins. The
giant had brought some of the firewood into the cave with him and he
threw it into the embers.

A resinous piece of wood suddenly caught the flame and flared up,
filling the cavern with red light. One of the sailors dropped his
spear with a loud clatter as the flames made plain the figure of the
monster.

Polyphemus turned his head and saw them.

He stared steadily at them with his single eye for full a minute. A
cruel smile played on his face.

"Who are you, strangers?" he said at length, in a thick, low voice
like the swell of a great organ. "Merchants, are you? Pirates? And
whence come you along the paths of the sea?"

Then Ulysses spoke in a smooth voice of conciliation. "We are Greeks,
oh lord, soldiers of Agamemnon's army, bound for home over the seas
from Troy. Bad weather has driven us out of our course, and so we have
come to you and beg you to be our honoured host. Oh, great lord, have
reverence for the gods, for Zeus himself is the god of hospitality."

Then the giant smiled cunningly. "You are a man of little wit,
stranger," he said, "or else you have indeed come from the very end of
the world. I pay no heed to Zeus, for I am stronger than he. But now,
tell me, where is your ship?"

But Ulysses, the wary one, saw the snare and answered humbly, "The
great Poseidon, god of the deep, wrecked our ship upon the rocks, and
we alone survive of all our company."

The giant looked fixedly at the trembling band for a moment. Then,
with a sudden movement, he snatched among the mariners and grasped two
of them in his mighty hand.

The swift horror remained with them in all their after life. He
stripped the clothes from each like a man strips the scales from a
prawn with one quick twirl of his fingers.

Then he dashed the quivering bodies upon the ground so that the yellow
paste of the brains smeared the stone--save for the horrid crunching
of bone and flesh, and the liquid gurgle of the monster's throat as he
made his frightful meal, there was no sound in the cave.

Then he fell into a foul sleep.

Three times during the long night did Ulysses draw his sword to
plunge it into the monster's heart, three times did he sheathe it
again. For in his wisdom he knew that if he killed Polyphemus no one
could ever move away the great stone which shut them from the outside
world.

In the morning Elpenor and one other died, and the giant drove his
flocks to pasture and closed up the heroes in the cave.

Then Ulysses comforted the dying hearts of his men, and as Polyphemus
strode away over the hills whistling to his cattle, he made a plan for
one last bid for freedom.

Leaning against the wall of the cave was a great club of hard wood
which the monster had put there to dry. It was an olive-tree trunk as
big as the great spar of a ship.

This they took and sharpened with their swords, and hardened it in the
flame of the fire and hid it carefully away. Then very sadly the
sailors cast lots as to who should be the four to help the captain.
All day long they sat in the foetid cave and prayed to the gods for an
alms of aid. And their hearts were leaden for love of their valiant
comrades.

At eventime two more heroes died.

Then Ulysses rose, and though his knees were weak and his face
blanched with agony, he spoke in a smooth voice. "My Lord Cyclops," he
said, "I have filled this bowl with wine which we brought with us. I
pray you drink, and perchance your heart may be touched and you will
let us go."

So the giant took the bowl from the king, and as Ulysses went near
him his breath reeked of carrion and blood. He drank the wine, which
was a sweet and drowsy vintage from the Lotus Island. "Give me more,"
he cried thickly, "and say how you are named, for I will grant you a
favour."

Ulysses filled the bowl for him three times. "Oh, my lord," he said,
"my friends and parents call me Noman, for that is my name. Now, great
lord, your boon."

The giant leered at the hero with drunken cunning. "Noman, since that
is your name Noman, you shall die last of all, and the others first.
That is your boon!"

And once more he sank into his sleep, gorged with blood and wine.

The hours wore on and the flames of the fire sank into a bright red
glow. The loud stertorous breathing of the monster became more deep
and regular. Very silently the five rose from among the rest and stole
towards the fire with the great stake. They pressed it into the heart
of the white hot embers and sat watching it change from black to
crimson, while little sparks ran up and down the sides like flies upon
the wall.

When the spar was just about to burst into flame they drew it out, and
with quick, nervous footsteps carried it to where Polyphemus lay
sleeping. The glow from the hot hard wood played upon that vast
blood-smeared countenance and the yellow wrinkled lid which veiled the
cruel eye.

Ulysses directed the point to the exact centre of the foul skin, and
then with their old battle cry of "Helen!" the five heroes pressed it
home through the hissing, steaming eyeball, turning it round and round
until everything was burned away.

They had just time to leap aside when the giant rose in horrid agony.
His cries of rage and pain were like the cries of a thousand tortured
beasts, and the din was so great that pieces of rock began to fall
from the roof of the cave. He spun round in his torture, beating upon
the walls with his arms and head until they were a raw and bleeding
wound.

At this awful sound mighty footsteps were heard outside the cave as
the other giants rushed down from the hills. There came great and
terrible voices shouting together, and it was as though a great storm
was racing through the world.

"What ails you, brother, that you call us from sleep in the night?"
cried the giants.

"Help! help! brothers. Noman is murdering me. I die!"

A chorus of thunderous laughter came rolling back. "If Noman harms
thee, then how should we aid thee, brother? 'Tis the gods who have
sent thee a sickness which thou must endure."

And now, through an aperture high up in the cave, the light began to
whiten, and showed day was at hand. The footsteps of the Cyclopes grew
faint and ceased, but Polyphemus lay moaning by the great stone which
closed the entrance.

The morning light grew stronger, and a breeze stole in, fresh and
clean, and played upon the faces of the prisoners.

The ewes began to bleat, for their milking time was at hand, and the
rams cried out for freedom and the green pastures of the hill.

The giant moved aside the stone to let them go and in the morning
sunlight the sailors could see that he felt over them with his hands
so that no men should mingle with them and so escape.

First the ewes went out and then the young rams, and last of all the
great old rams, patriarchs of the flock, began to move slowly towards
the door.

Then courage came back to Ulysses, and with it all his cunning.
Stooping low under the belly of a great beast, he motioned to his
friends to do likewise, and, slowly, in this way, holding to the
fleece of the rams, they moved out of the cave. They could feel the
rams tremble when the giant's hands ranged over the wool of their
backs, but nevertheless they came safely out into the light, and stole
down to where their ship yet lay at anchor.

The air of the morning was like wine to them, and the face of the
water as dear as the face of a well-beloved wife as they ran over the
bright yellow sand.

Then from the stern of the boat Ulysses cried out in a great voice of
triumph. At that sound the monster came stumbling from his cave,
reeling like a drunken man, and calling on his father Poseidon, Lord
of the Sea, to avenge him on his enemies. He took up the stone that
had barred the cave and threw it far out into the water, but it
overshot the boat and did not harm the heroes, though the wave of its
descent flung the ship from side to side as if it were a piece of
driftwood. The mariners bent to the oars, and the vessels moved away
from that accursed shore, slowly at first but more swiftly as their
tired arms grew strong with the chance of safety, and the wine of hope
flowed in their veins once more.

They saw the sightless face of Polyphemus working horribly, his mouth
opening and shutting like a dying fish as he looked heavenwards and
implored his mighty father's aid.

And after a space of mourning for the brave dead the heroes set out
again over the sad grey seas, seeking Ithaca.

But the heart of King Ulysses was sick and weary, for he dreaded the
wrath to come, and most of all he longed for home.




THE SECOND EPISODE

THE ADVENTURE OF THE PALACE IN THE WOOD


Ulysses slowly mounted the wooded hill. The path which rose towards
the summit wound in and out through thick undergrowth, and his feet
made no sound upon the green moss of the track.

He had his spear ready for any game that he might chance on, but for
half a day he saw no living thing save a few mailed lizards that lay
open-eyed upon a stone.

No birds twittered in the forest on the mountainside, only the wild
bees sang in the stillness like jewels with voices.

How beautiful the wood was! and how mysterious also. Ulysses felt a
quickening of the pulses which did not come from fear, and a strange
excitement possessed him which arose from he knew not what cause.

The trees in the forest were very old and grew thickly together. The
trunks were painted delicate greens, greys and browns by lichens, and
the foliage overhead met and made a roof of bright leaves. Beneath
this canopy there was a sort of twilight like the gloom in the temple
of Zeus at Sparta.

Ulysses toiled on and up. After a time the trees began to open out
and grow less thickly. The moss-carpet began to be rocky and uneasy to
walk upon, so that Ulysses knew that he must be nearing the top.

At last he climbed a few worn boulders and stood alone upon the peak.
From that great height he could discern the sea on all sides of the
island. Beyond the thick woodlands below, the yellow sands of the
shore went out to meet the water, and the king could see the ship
riding at anchor and a small boat plying from it to a tiny group of
black dots upon the beach.

Ulysses sent his gaze circling slowly over the unbroken green of the
woods. When his roving glance fell upon the very centre of the island
he started suddenly and shaded his eyes from the sunlight with both
hands. A thick column of blue smoke was rising from among the trees,
and looking more intently than before he could see the gleam of white
marble here and there through the greenwood, and catch the sunlight
glinting upon copper.

He had learned what he came to know; there was life upon the island.
But of what kind? Did some fearful monster lurk yonder, three miles
away in the forest. Another Cyclops, perchance, or some angry god
wroth at a disturbance of his privacy.

The still smoke rose into the soft air and a great calm seemed to
brood over the place. No birds flew about the roofs.

He began to retrace his steps down towards his comrades on the shore
to tell them what he had seen.

The wood was as still as before, but when he came to the meadow lands
below he dropped quickly behind a clump of fern, for his keen eyes had
seen a smooth brown flank not far away. A great stag was drinking at a
little stream which sang its way down from the mountain to the sea.
They had touched at the island with very little food left, and the
king had promised that he would return with spoils from hunting.

Just as the beast raised his head from the water the spear flashed
like a gleam of light from the clump of fern, and the quarry stumbled,
clattering among the stones with a sob.

Then Ulysses made a rope of willow twigs and tied the stag's feet
together and brought him to the ship.

Only half the crew were upon the shore, for the rest had gone to
explore the inward parts of the island with Eurylochus as their
leader.

They skinned the stag and made a fire, and roasted the sweet flesh
upon their spear points. While they sat eating, a man with a white
face came running over the shore towards them, and as they saw him
come they rose with their arms in fear, for they knew that once more
they had come to some dangerous and evil place, and that a deadly
peril lurked in the forest.

They saw he who ran was Eurylochus, and that he ran in terror.

But none followed him in pursuit, nor did any arrow come singing like
a bee from the shelter of the neighbouring trees.

Eurylochus rushed up to them and sank exhausted by the fire. Ulysses
gave him wine, and motioned the others to ask no questions but to let
the man tell his tale in his own way. For he knew it would be more
vivid so.

"More evil, comrades!" he sobbed out at last, "and good men and true
lost to us for ever. Know you where we have landed? This accursed
place is Ææa, the home of the Goddess Circe, and I have seen her face
to face."

Ulysses started violently, and despair crept into his eyes as he
motioned Eurylochus to proceed.

"We went up through the valleys," said the lieutenant, "and entered
the wood. After we had walked long, and were thirsty and weary, we
came to an open glade in which stood the house of Circe. It was built
of polished marble with copper roofs, and the trees made a thick wall
on all sides of the glade. A very strange, silent place! All round the
house were lions and mountain wolves playing with each other. We
turned to fly in fear, but the beasts fawned upon us with gentle paws
and waving tails, and we saw their eyes were sad and tame, and they
were all unlike the beasts of the field. They were as dogs at supper
begging for food from their masters. But it was an awful sight
nevertheless.

"Now, as we stood waiting in the porch, we heard a sweet low song
inside the palace, sweeter than any mortal song, like the flutes and
harps of the gods. Then we looked in, and we saw the goddess weaving
at a golden loom, and going up and down before it as she sang. And
Polites--oh, dear Polites!--called out to her, and the song ceased,
and Circe came out to us, and bade us enter, and her beauty was like
moonlight. Then the men went in, but I remained, mindful of the
Cyclops and fearing harm. So I sat down in the wood, and the beasts
played round me, and the lions licked my hands with their hard rough
tongues. But I could see what was toward in the palace hall.

"The goddess led them to rich couches and chairs, and she prepared a
drink for them of golden honey and purple wine, white fresh cheese,
and meal of corn. But she poured a brew of magic herbs into the drink,
and when they had passed the bowl from hand to hand and drunk she
waved a wand of cedar wood over them."

He stopped, choking with emotion and shaking with horror at what he
had seen. He covered his face with his hands.

Ulysses placed a firm hand upon his shoulder, and he took up his tale
once more. "And when she waved her wand behold a horror! For suddenly
my comrades dwindled, and were changed to swine. The bristles of swine
grew out upon them, and they grunted like swine, but still the souls
of men shone out of their eyes. And she drove them away into a pen,
and threw them beech nuts, laughing most musically. And I, the
unhappy one, fled and am come hither with my tale."

Ulysses rose with a pale set face, and stern hard lines flashed out
round his lips. For a moment he prayed in silence to Athene. Then he
slung his strung bow upon his shoulder, and loosened the arrows in the
quiver, testing each one for a flaw in the shaft. He took his great
silver-studded sword and buckled it round his waist. "I alone, my
comrades, must go to the palace of the enchantress," he said. "I have
no choice but to go and strive. May the gods preserve you, friends."

He was preparing to move away when they all entreated him to remain
with them, but he would not listen, and as he moved away and was lost
to their sight they broke out into loud praises of him among
themselves.

It was ever thus. Their father and captain was first in wisdom and
courage, and had always seemed to them more god than man.

Ulysses passed over the meadows with slow sure step, thinking deeply.
The forest closed about him, dark and lonely, and his walk changed. He
became alert, walking warily and softly. His keen eyes roved over the
untrodden paths, seeking to pierce the mystery of the greenwood.

He had halted by a brook for a moment, debating which path he should
venture, when help came to him.

There was a crash in the tree tops above him, a glittering ball of
light fell through the green, and a wind rushed among the leaves,
suddenly rousing all the voices of the wood.

    [Illustration: THEN HE CAME SWIFTLY UPON THE GLEAMING PALACE.
        _Page 45._]

A young and beautiful man, holding a golden rod, with a slight down
upon his lip, came towards him.

Ulysses knew that the God Hermes had flashed down from heaven to be
his counsellor. He fell upon his knees before the divine messenger.

"The great Athene has sent me to you, king," said the god, "for she
heard your prayer upon the shore, and will deliver you from the forest
danger. Here is a sprig of the magic herb moly. Take it in your hand
for a safeguard against the wiles of Circe.

"When you go into the palace she will mix you her enchanted potion,
and strike you with her wand. Do you draw your sword, and make as
though to slay her. Then she will fear greatly and swear to do you no
harm."

Ulysses took the white flowered talisman, and Hermes vanished among
the trees.

Then he came swiftly upon the gleaming palace, and going up to the
marble porch struck upon it with his sword hilt, and called to the
goddess.

She glimmered towards him. Her hair was like a young horse-chestnut
fresh from the pod. Her eyes were like pools of violet water, her neck
was a tower of ivory, and her lips were red as sunset.

The flower of evil, the goddess of strange sins!

She smiled at the hero, and led him by the hand to a table on which
was a golden cup, proffering it to him in welcome.

Ulysses bowed low before her loveliness, and as he drank there was a
strange smile in his eyes.

The enchantress looked at him steadily. For a single moment a ripple
of doubt crossed her face, but suddenly she seized her cedarn rod and
smote his side, crying, "Get you to the stye, and lie there in filth
with your companions."

Ulysses drew his great sword, and held it over her with menacing eyes.
She drooped to him, a very woman! and clung round him, weeping, and he
could feel her warm heart beating, beating close to his. Her lovely
hair fell around her in a golden cloud, and tears streamed down her
cheeks as she swore by the gods on the Holy Hill never to harm him.

And looking on her sinful loveliness the brain of Ulysses burned for
her, and he took her lithe body in his strong arms and pressed the
blossom of her lips to his. Her arms stole round him, and she called
him lord and king.

Then with a soft smile she led him to the courtyard where the swine
lay sleeping in the sun. When the foul beasts saw Ulysses they set up
a horrid chorus of grunting, and he raged to see his valiant friends
so degraded. But clinging to him, the goddess raised her hand, and the
swine vanished, and the goodly mariners stood up among the straw, more
straight and tall than before, with all the marks of hardship and
travel smoothed from their faces.

That night the other mariners came up from the shore, guided by
Ulysses. And the amber lamps flared in the hall, and all night till
daybreak they made a great feast. They sang in praise of love and
wine, and Circe sat at the right hand of the King of Ithaca.

When the rosy dawn rushed up the sky, the goddess rose.

The lamps paled in the fresh new light, and the feast was over.

The mariners lay in sleep about the board, and the purple wine was
spilt about them.

Only the Goddess and the Hero were awake.

Then she said, "Lord and love, the night is over. The sun climbs the
sky, the woodlands awake. But let us go into my scented chamber, my
purple chamber where the day never comes. There will we lie in love
and sleep and forget the day."

She led him by the hand over the cool marble floor. The purple
curtains fell behind them with a soft noise of falling. All sound was
hushed in the courts of the palace, and the whole house was still.




THE THIRD EPISODE

HOW ULYSSES WALKED IN HELL, AND OF THE ADVENTURE OF THE SIRENS AND
SCYLLA


The King of Ithaca stood all alone on a gloomy barren shore, spear in
hand. The sky lowered black overhead, and from the vast yawning hole
in the terrible cliff which rose up before him he seemed to hear
strange wailings and faint cries coming, so it seemed, from a great
distance.

Had he at last broken away from the loving arms of Circe for this
horror? Stung once more by the latent manhood in his blood, he had
roused his energies and left the enchanted island to set out once more
upon the weary quest for home. He had bade the goddess farewell and
sailed away from the island of sweet lust to seek a ghostly counsellor
and to drink deep at that fountain of wisdom which was once the glory
of Thebes.

When Circe had bade him, if he would indeed get back to Ithaca and
leave her arms, seek the dead Tiresias in the place of the dead it had
seemed an easy thing.

What were pale ghosts to a warrior of Troyland and the vanquisher of
Polyphemus? If the old seer alone could tell him how to conquer the
wrath of Poseidon and win to his wife's arms once more, should he not
go with a will?

    [Illustration: THEN HE WAS, IN AN INSTANT MOMENT, AWARE OF A
      MORE THAN MORTAL PRESENCE.
        _Page 49._]

And he had set out with his crew, and the magic wind which Circe gave
them had brought them hither over grey sad seas, while they had
touched nor oars nor helm.

And now Ulysses went slowly up to the fissure in the rock, but a long
solitary cry made him reel back trembling as his brave heart had never
done before.

Then he was, in an instant moment, aware of a more than mortal
presence. Into that dread place came the awful majesty of the Queen of
Heaven, and he fell to the ground before Athene.

The full flowing river of her speech came down upon him.

"If thou wouldst hold thy wife once more, Ulysses, and see thy rocky
western home, then must thou dare this peril. None can help thee now
save thou thyself. So it is decreed by the gods. If so be it that thy
courage fails thee now then wilt thou be a wanderer for ever."

"Lady of Heaven," he said, "I dare not go. Oh, anything but that."

"Penelope!" she murmured sweetly.

"I cannot face the dead."

"Ithaca."

"Oh, listen to those wailings in the abyss!"

"Thy father Laertes weeps yet for the wanderer."

"The dead! The dead are waiting there!"

"Men call thee Ulysses!" said the goddess, and at that word something
moved within him and his limbs began to stiffen, and once more the
hero felt the spear-shank hard and cold within his grasp.

He raised his face, and there was once more the old proud light upon
it. Athene had gone, and big with his new resolve he stepped towards
the blackness.

A voice came to him, thin, and far down.

"Ulysses! Ulysses! son of Laertes, I wait to guide thee. Hermes, son
of Zeus, is with thee. Take courage in both hands and come."

The king moved forward, and the dark swallowed him up. He stumbled
along a descending rock-strewn pathway. In the increasing gloom it
seemed to him that he was on the side of a steep hill. A moaning wind
encircled him. Now and again a slight gleam was visible from the
golden helmet of the god.

Far far down he saw the leaden livid river of death, and on the sullen
tide floated the stately funeral barge of Charon, the ferryman of the
dead.

The wind grew even more mournful and sad as they trod the meadows of
asphodel and the grey lilies of the underworld towards the marge of
Styx.

Then the god called out aloud to the ferryman. As his voice echoed
over the water, the dusky night became full of the sound of wings, and
dark shapes filled the air. The spirits of the dead flapped round them
in continual movement.

The ghosts began to call and cry to the living hero. Some had little
squeaky voices like bats, others made a louder and more hollow sound.

The howlings of the formless increased all round Ulysses.

The inarticulate found utterance in the indefinite.

The waves of weird and hopeless voices rose, fell, undulated, now loud
and shrill, now sobbing into silence. Little eager whispers filled the
hero's ear.

And to the terror of these great murmurs were added the sight of
superhuman outlines, which melted away in the gloom almost as they
appeared. Alecto and Tisiphone, the Furies, circled round Ulysses, and
Megeara flew through the dark to her sisters.

A cold hand seemed placed upon the hero's soul. Cries from precipice
to precipice, from air to water, went on unceasingly--the melancholy
vociferations of the lost!

The loquacity of Hell!

And in deadly fear, but resolute still, Ulysses struggled on through
this great twilight world, open on all sides. As he walked on, the
flying outlaws of the tomb seemed to be swarming over him and pressing
him to the ground. He struggled beneath the weight of lost souls, but
his whirling arms struck nothing but the empty air.

Fresh clouds of spirits pricked the twilight, increased in size,
amalgamated, thickened, and hurried towards him, crying.

They came to the brink of the river. Before them, as they looked out
over the water, was no horizon, but an opaque lividity like a wan,
moving precipice, a cliff of the night.

Then the old man Charon bowed to the commands of the gods and embarked
them on his barge. He gazed on Ulysses with his keen wicked eyes, and
his long white beard wagged in hideous mockery at this mortal among
the dead.

The thin pole dipped in and out of the water, and the drops which fell
from it were the colour of leaden bullets, for there is no life in the
water of Styx.

Ulysses knelt in the bottom of the boat and shut out Hell from his
eyes with his hand. He prayed to Athene for help to endure, and that
he might have an answer from the old Seer Tiresias that would lead him
safely home at last.

And now the other bank of the river began to loom up before them and
the air began to be silent.

On the bank, as it seemed to welcome them, stood a tall old man with a
golden sceptre in his hand. His face was full of an unutterable
sadness, and his eyes were horny and dim with blindness. But his magic
staff conducted him safely to the river brink, and in a high shivering
voice he hailed Ulysses.

"Why hast thou come here, O wise one, leaving the happy daylight for
this cheerless shore? Noble son of Laertes, I know thy quest, and thus
make answer. Father Zeus gave me power, which still remains, and I,
an old blind ghost, can see into the future even on the shores of
Styx. Thou seekest to know if thou wilt ever catch thy wife in thy
strong arms once more, and tread the well-beloved fields of Ithaca.
The mighty god of the sea, Poseidon, is wroth with thee and a
malevolent god. For even now his son Polyphemus stumbles a bruised and
sightless way among his native hills. But yet you may return after
long woes and heavy toil. But one thing bear well in mind, O king,
else wilt thou suffer unbelievable things. When thy ship touches at
the Island Thrinacia, great herds of cattle will be feeding there on
the fresh sweet grass which grows in the goodly upper world. These be
the beeves and steers of the divine Helios, the Sun-God, and must be
inviolate to men. But if one sacred beast is slain, then thy ship and
all thy company will perish.

"Perchance thou thyself may win Ithaca forlorn, and to find others in
thy place, but that I know not. I have spoken."

    [Illustration: THEY CAME TO THE BRINK OF THE RIVER.
        _Page 52._]

Then with a long melancholy cry the figure vanished into the dark.

But in its place came a shadowy form which made the heart of the hero
leap and beat, so it seemed all Hades was filled with the tumult.

His mother Anticlea stood before him.

Stretching out her cold, thin hands she spoke.

"My boy that I suckled, why hast thou come into Hades not yet being
dead, for I see that the flesh is still warm upon thee for which I
drank to Zeus?"

"Mother of mine, I sought Tiresias the Theban prophet. I have not
even yet won Ithaca nor seen the dear ones there. A god is against me.
So I came through the spirits of the unburied, and over the dark river
to seek counsel of the seer. Knowest thou in this beyond-earth if the
beloved Penelope still holds me in her heart? or is she perhaps here
with thee, lost to the sunlight?"

The mother of Ulysses answered, "Penelope is as faithful and true as
on thy wedding day, but she is in a peril, so haste ye home. And now
farewell." Where Ulysses had seen his mother, was but a little grey
vapour which swayed and vanished.

Then the hero called roughly to Charon, and bade him take the pole and
urge the barge back to the starting-place. This time, though the
multitude of the dead circled over him with cries, begging his help to
take them out of Hades, he felt no fear, for his mind was burning with
other thoughts.

He mounted the long cliff side, and at last in the distance saw a
faint gleam of light stealing down towards him. In the pale gleam the
figure of Hermes was manifest for a moment flitting up to the day
before him.

The cries grew fainter and more faint. The light changed from grey to
primrose, from primrose to yellow. The little star which was the mouth
of the cave became a sun and then a world, and the yellow turned into
the white hot sunshine as Hell faded utterly away.

On the beach the little blue waves sang on the yellow sand. The black
divers rose lazily on the swell, and the shields round the prow of the
ship shone like white fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more the vessel of heroes swam over the seas. And now there was
another quality in the wind for them, and the world was a new world.

Their leader had told them that if they obeyed his commands they would
win home once more. The news he had brought back from Hades made them
sturdy and strong of heart, and they vowed that in all things they
would trust in the king who had dared the perils of the underworld.

Their thoughts turned with a lover's thirst to images of their native
land, tranquil skies, the old-remembered meadows, cool brooks, and
eternal peace after their long wandering.

Hope beat high in the heart of Ulysses also. The grey nightmare of
Hell was over and in the past, one more memory when in his own halls
he would weave his saga.

He had been near to the awful thing Death.

He had found that after all it was only Death.

The ship with a fair wind ran up a lane of light into the setting sun,
and when at length the moon had risen and silvered all the sea,
Ulysses called the men round him.

"Comrades," he said, "with the dawn, if I have kept the reckoning
aright, we shall come to the island where the Sirens dwell. Now the
Lady Circe warned me against the Sirens, the singers who charm all men
with their song. He who listens to Parthenope, Ligeia and Leucosia
must stay with them for ever, listening spellbound to the song until
he dies. And the island is covered with the bones of dead men. To
listen is to die. But I wish to hear the voices and to escape the
enchantment, and so obey my commands. When we near the island do you
all close your ears with wax so that no sound can reach your brains.
And take a stout rope and bind me to the mast so that I can in no wise
loose myself. And howsoever I may order or entreat you to let me go to
the Sirens, if their magic song enchants me, take no heed, but row
steadily onwards until the island is far astern. Then only may you set
me free."

As dawn came, a faint grey line upon the horizon showed itself on the
starboard bow. At the sight, with some laughter, for it was difficult
to believe in the perils of sweet music!--even for men who had seen
the wonders that they had seen--the men began to press yellow wax from
the honeycomb into each other's ears.

Then when no one among them could hear the flapping of the sail or the
voice of the sea, nor could tell the meaning of his neighbour's voice,
they went up to Ulysses, and with many light-hearted jests bound him
to the mast, and because his strength was well known to them they
reeved the rope with a treble hitch. No living man could have escaped
from such bonds.

As sailors will, they treated the whole thing as a huge jest, making a
mock mutiny of it as they bound the captain. Ulysses could not help
smiling at their mirth.

After such wise precaution he had no fear, and in his heart of hearts
he did not believe that the song of the Sirens would affect him much,
though he followed the advice of Circe and made himself a prisoner.

But a fierce curiosity possessed him. He cursed the slowness of the
wind, for, as they bound him, the island was still a low line without
colour on the water, and called out to the men to row faster,
forgetting that they could not hear him.

Slowly the grey island became purple, then brown, and at last showed
itself a green, low, pleasant land, a place of meadows.

The wind was behind them, and until they came quite close under the
lee of the island Ulysses could hear no voices but those of the wind
and waves. Then faintly at first, but rapidly becoming more sonorous
and sweet, he heard the magic voices which were to ring in his ears in
all his after life.

No words of his at any time could express the loveliness of those
voices, of the unutterable sweetness of it, nothing.

The strains floated over the still sea like harps of heaven.

All that man had known or desired in life, all the emotions which had
stirred the human heart, were blended in those magic voices. The world
had nothing more to give; here, here at last, was the absolute
fulfilment of beauty.

Louder and more piercingly sweet, as the unconscious sailors bent to
the oars in earnest, and the sweat ran down their bare brown backs.

    "Whither away, whither away, whither away? Fly no more.
    Whither away from the high green field, and the happy
        blossoming shore?
    Day and night to the billow the fountain calls:
    Down shower the gambolling waterfalls
      From wandering over the lea."

The face of Ulysses grew wan and grey as the ship passed a projecting
point of rock. On the smooth green turf the three singers were
standing. In face and form they were sweet and lovely girls.

Naked to the waist, they wore long flowing draperies below, and as
they sung the rosy bosoms rose and fell with the music, and the lucid
throats rippled with song.

    "Mariner, mariner, furl your sails,
    For here are blissful downs and dales,
    And merrily, merrily carol the gales,
    And the spangle dances in bight and bay,
    And the rainbow forms and flies on the land
    Over the islands free;
    And the rainbow lives in the curve of the sand;
    Hither, come hither and see."

And still the ship went on, but more slowly, as it were some force
were at work deadening the arms of the rowers.

Then the shrill loveliness fired the hero's blood, and he knew that he
must go to the three lovely singers on the strand. Earth held nothing
better than this--to lie for ever with that music in his ears.

    "Whither away? listen and stay: mariner, mariner, fly no more."[1]

    [1] These few lines of the Sirens' song have been taken from
    Lord Tennyson's beautiful poem "The Sea Fairies."

Then, as if drawn by the long cadenced notes as by cords, Ulysses
gathered up his mighty strength and strove with his bonds.

But the sailors had done their work too well, and the rope only cut
deeply into the flesh.

The white arms were stretched out to him in supplication, the song
grew more full of unearthly beauty than before--and the ship was
slowly passing by.

Ulysses called out to the crew in an agony of command and entreaty.

One of the men happened to look up and saw his face. He grinned,
nudged his companion, and turned away.

The song grew fainter, the three tall figures dwindled. The face of
Ulysses grew ashen, and when at length they came to him and cut the
ropes he said no word.

He went alone to the prow of the vessel and looked out over the fair
sun-bathed sea, and there were tears in his eyes, and his mouth was
softer and more tremulous than it was wont to be.

So they came away from Parthenope, Ligeia and Leucosia, the Sirens.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day Ulysses called the crew together as before and told them
of the new peril that awaited them. For the wise Circe had warned him
that after the island of the Sirens he must needs encounter the
terrible Scylla, for the ship must pass by her lair on its passage
towards Home.

But Ulysses knew that it was impossible to fight the monster, and that
some of the crew were fated to die, but in his wisdom he did not tell
them that.

He finished his speech as follows:--"And so, my friends, the gods
ordain that we must face Scylla, and the whirlpool Charybdis. There is
no other way. But courage! always have courage. I who brought you safe
from out of the cave of the Cyclops will bring you safe from this
also. And so onward and have stout hearts."

It was a misty day, and everything was shadowy and faint, but the ship
moved slowly along a sheer wall of black cliff which towered up above
them for a thousand feet or more. The top was lost in the mist. It was
a lowering, frightful place.

One of the sailors gave a shout which echoed back to them in mournful
mockery through the mist.

They rowed on steadily, hugging the cliff. Ulysses stood in the prow
of the boat. He had put on armour and took two spears in his hand.

His eyes searched the face of the cliff till they ached from the
minute scrutiny.

This waiting for the inevitable was terribly unnerving. Ulysses
himself, knowing that some must die, was heavy and sad at heart as
they glided along the side of the cliff.

To the left the great whirlpool seethed and boiled, its outermost
convolution scarce a bow-shot away. When it threw up the water the
spray dashed up a hundred feet and fell in showers over the sailors,
and as the water ran back in the ebb Ulysses could see, far down the
black and spinning sides, to where the old witch Charybdis dwelt on
the dark sand of the sea bottom.

Suddenly the end came. A loud barking and howling startled them all so
that each man paused on his oar. A pack of hounds were unkenneled, so
it seemed, somewhere on the cliff face in the mist.

Then a sickly musky smell enveloped them, so foul and stale that they
coughed and spat even as their blood ran cold with fear.

Through the curtain of mist, which had suddenly grown very thick, six
objects loomed right over the boat.

Six long tentacles swayed and quivered over the sailors, and at the
end of each was a grinning head set with cruel fangs and a little red
eager tongue that flickered in and out.

For a moment the heads hung poised, and then each sought and found its
victim.

Six sailors were slowly drawn out of the boat, shrieking the name of
Ulysses for the last time in their death agony. And all the time the
barking of the hounds in the obscene womb of the monster went on
unceasingly.

Then the fury of flight came upon them. With bursting brains and red
fire before their eyes they laboured at the great oars until the wood
bent and shook and the ship leaped forward like a driven horse.

And they left the strait of death and came out of the mist into a wide
sunlit sea. But still a sound of distant barking came down the wind.

So Scylla took her horrid toll of heroes.

But Ulysses called them to prayer and lamentation for the dead.




THE FOURTH EPISODE

HOW ULYSSES LOST HIS MERRY MEN AND CAME A WAIF TO CALYPSO WITH THE
SHINING HAIR


The crew sat round a fire of driftwood.

There was shelter where they sat, in a natural alcove of rock, but
outside the great winds thundered and the wrack flew before the storm
and a mighty unceasing roar filled the air.

The faces of all the sailors wore a sullen look. Hunger had begun to
suck the colour from their cheeks, their eyes were prominent and
strained, their movements without energy or vigour.

A rude shelter of sailcloth and various _débris_ that was scattered
about seemed to show that for some time, at least, they had made their
home in this place where the winds did not come.

Ulysses was not among them. They were talking in low, discontented
tones among themselves.

"A whole month," said Eurylochus, "a whole month have we been sea
bound in this accursed island. I am sick of islands!"

"Never have we put to shore without some evil thing befalling," said
another. "Oh, for Ithaca!"

"I doubt we shall ever see Ithaca again," said a third. "We will be
wanderers till we die; that is what I think. And this place is like to
be the grave of all of us. I never knew a wind so furious to blow so
long. We should sink in an hour did we but put out."

"There is only food for one day more, and that sparse," said
Eurylochus. "For my part, my limbs are heavy as brass and the strength
is all gone from me. I could not move an oar now. Man needs meat and
wine or the fires of hunger burn the sinews and dry the blood. Brown
meat and red wine! I could fill my belly till the skin cracked!"

"The rich brown meat, mate! Dost mind the soft kids on Circe's island?
By Zeus, I can taste them now!"

"Ay and the fat cows, roast till the blood ran out of them like liquid
life."

"I can even smell the smell of the roasting meat now. A welcome smell
to a hungry man."

"Would that we had never left Circe. 'Twas a kind queen, meet for our
master! but her girls were kindly in love also."

"To Hades with the girls!" said Eurylochus. "Thy talk of meat makes me
heave with desire."

He looked round cautiously before he continued.

"Friends," he said in a low, rapid whisper, "tell me, are ye purposing
to starve in the midst of plenty? Saw ye ever such fat oxen and cows
as graze in the pastures above?"

"Never did I see such cattle," answered another hungry wight. "Gods!
they would make a feast for kings."

"And yet pain and sickness is all over us, and we lust for food till
we know not what we do!"

"Captain's orders!"

"Ulysses has lost his cunning for sure, and hunger has turned his
brain. He is no more the brave leader of old. He goes wandering alone
among the rocks and sleeps all day. And his eye is clouded and courage
has left his voice. Friends, shall we die thus? No man of ye loveth
Ulysses better than I love him. Is he not my kinsman indeed? He
brought us from the Cyclops' cave and dared the perils of Hell. All
this I know and say before you now. But the king is distraught and
moody. He does not know what he is doing. He would be the first to
join us with the merry and grateful word were he to come back and find
the good red beef roasting on the fire and smell the savoury smoke."

"Ay, captain was never one set against a feast! He loves good cheer,
as becomes a proper fighting man."

"My mind doubts me, comrades," said another. "Should we not rather
trust the king even unto this last thing? Have we ever found him
wanting yet? Did he not make us promise? Zeus knows if the thought of
hot meat does not tickle my belly as well as thine--more, friend, for
thou hast a paunch yet and none have I--but I for one trust in the
captain. He knows."

Then Eurylochus took up his spear as if he had decided and the
discussion was over.

"Listen, men," he said. "In all shapes death is a terrible thing. But
I would rather die quickly at Scylla's hands than fade into Hades
through famine. Hunger is the worst death of all. Come with me and
bring your spears. We will choose the best of the herd and sacrifice
to the gods. When we reach home again, can we not build a great temple
to Helios, and fill it with rich gifts? The Sun-God, who gives light
to all the world, will not grudge us a cow or two. Not he. 'Tis a more
genial god than that. Ay, and though we indeed anger the god and he
wreck us in the deep! I put ye this question--Would ye not rather
swallow the cold salt water for a moment and so die, than die for days
among the rocks?"

His pale face worked with the force of his words. His eyes glistened
with a terrible eagerness. As he spoke in a high, quivering nervous
tenor, shaking his spear at them, the eagerness crept into their eyes
also.

Famine strangely transforms the human face. They became men with
brute's eyes.

Eurylochus marched away out of the shelter towards the pasture lands,
and the others followed him. New strength seemed to come to them as
they walked towards the herd, which could be seen, a red brown mass,
grazing on a plain some half-mile away.

The full force of the wind struck and retarded them as they emerged
into the open, but it brought the lowing of the cattle to their ears
and they pressed on.

Ulysses lay sleeping about a quarter of a mile from the cove.

He had wandered away from his companions in great despondency. For
four long weeks the gale had roared past the island away to the north.
The rain had fallen like spears, the thunder stammered its awful
message, the green and white lightning snapped like whips of light. In
all this the king saw the finger of evil. He knew that the mighty
Poseidon still watched his fortunes with cruel, angry eyes. For this
storm was no chance warring of the elements, but came, he knew,
directed against him and his fated crew.

Food had got lower and lower, the men began to grumble, and black
looks of reproach met his eyes on every side.

And all the time the fat cattle of Apollo cropped the tender shoots of
the grass, the full udder dropped with creamy milk, and the shining
flanks of the great beasts sent an alluring message to the starving
men.

Often Ulysses withdrew into some lonely place and prayed to Athene,
but she seemed asleep or weary of his woes, for there came no
answering sign.

On this day hope seemed to have utterly departed from him. There was
no break in the leaden clouds of the future.

He had wandered away along the seashore, and fallen asleep from
languor and grief, lulled by the great singing of the gale overhead.

In his sleep he dreamed vividly. He saw the interior of the island.
Suddenly, from among a clump of trees, a bright beam of golden light
shot up heavenwards. He knew that one of the shepherd nymphs of Apollo
went with some message for the god, and he shivered and moaned in his
slumber.

Then it seemed that he was in a great place of cloud, an immense
formless world of mist. And through the mist came a terrible voice
which turned him to stone. It was the voice of Apollo crying in anger.

"Oh, Father Zeus, and all ye gods who dwell upon the hill above the
thunder! punish the comrades of Ulysses for their crime. They have
speared my beautiful cows that were my joy and of which I had great
pleasure. Whenever I turned my face and shone upon the world I watched
them feeding in my island. And now these whelps have slain the finest
of all my herd. Vengeance! Bitter vengeance, or will I go far down
into Hell and leave the world in gloom and shine no more upon it. I
will make Hades a place of warmth and laughter, and the world all grey
and full of death."

In the midst Ulysses awoke with that angry cry still ringing in his
ears. With a sick apprehension he hurried along the slippery boulders
to the shelter place where he had left the crew.

Within a hundred yards of the place he knew the worst. The wind blew
a savoury smoke towards him, and his stomach yearned while his brain
trembled in fear.

The men were in high glee when he came round the corner of rock among
them, great joints turned upon rough spits, skins and horns encumbered
the ground, and the rich fat dropped hissing into the fire.

A sudden silence fell upon their merriment as the captain came. He
spread out his hands with a gesture of despair.

"Comrades," he said sorrowfully, "ye have chosen to do this thing
against my advice, and now it is done we must abide by the deed. I
cannot reproach you. Still, I know that we must pay heavily for this
sin against the Sun-God. Farewell, Ithaca! And now it is over let us
eat of our unhallowed spoil. It may be that this is our last meal
together, comrades."

As he had finished speaking a strange and ominous thing happened. The
blood-stained skins began to creep about like live things upon the
ground.

The red meat over the fire withered and moaned as if in pain. The air
was filled with a lowing as of cows.

Then in mad fear and riotous despair they fell upon the horrid meal
with eager, tremulous hands. Ulysses was taken with the madness like
the rest, and until sundown they gorged the dripping meat till they
could eat no more, and their faces were bloated and their eyes were
strained.

As the sun sank into the sea with a red and angry face the wind
dropped and ceased. A great calm spread over the waters. When the moon
rose the ocean was like a sheet of still silver.

Very hurriedly, whispering among themselves, as though they were
afraid of their own voices, they launched the ship and rowed out into
the moonlight, racing away from the accursed isle.

And now the last scene of all came very quickly.

Ulysses was wont to say that of all the things he had witnessed in his
life this was the saddest and most terrible.

A sudden crackle of thunder pealed over the sky. A fantastic network
of lightning played round the ship like lace.

A dark cloud formed itself directly over the boat, not two mast's
lengths above, and all the waves below became like ink in the shadow.
For a time it hung there motionless, and then suddenly a mighty wind
swooped down on them like a hawk drops out of the sky. The mast
snapped like a pipe-stem and crashed upon the deck, braining the
helmsman in its fall. A smooth green wave, just slightly bubbling with
froth on the crest, but like a hill of oil, rose and swept over the
ship.

Ulysses clung to a stanchion with all his mighty strength, and was
just able to battle against the flood. When it passed over him he saw
that every man of the crew was in the water. For a few moments they
floated round him with sad cries of farewell, and then one by one they
were swept into the Ultimate.

The timbers of the ship broke away and she fell to pieces. With a loud
cry to Athene, Ulysses launched himself on the waves clinging to a
great log which had formed part of the keel. A swift current urged him
along far away from the scene of the wreck.

The purpose of the god was accomplished, and the waves fell, and the
moonlight shone out clear and still once more.

On all the waste of waters no sail, no cape nor headland broke the
silver monotone.

Loneliness descended upon the hero like a cloak; an utter abandonment
such as he had never known before in life.

The water began to grow very cold.

An awful silence lay over the sea. The terrible jubilant silence of a
god revenged!

"And so all those well-known, long-tried voices were still! Never
again would Eurylochus drain the full tankard in a kindly health."

Ulysses bowed his head, and bitter tears welled up into his eyes.

"Never again would grey old Diphilos stand at the helm of the good
ship, sending his keen eyes out over the sounding wastes. How the last
mournful cry of Jamenos had echoed through the storm. Young, straight
Jamenos who had approached the Cyclops with him, beautiful young
Jamenos, with the bold eyes and curling hair! And there was old
Perdix too, old Perdix with his grin and chuckle and his tales. Never
would Perdix sit by the fire and make merry yarns any more. The little
twinkling rat-like eyes were stark and glazed now. Perdix stood beside
the livid river among the rushing spirits. He would have no jests
now."

He saw them all together, in peril, storm, and quiet weather. His
trusty men! His dear comrades!

And now he alone was left, alone, alone, alone.

Perhaps Athene herself was still with him and had not even yet
forgotten her wanderer. As the thought struck along his brain a faint
blush of hope began to flush his pallid cheek.

He floated on and on. Dawn came, waxed strong, waned. Tremulous
evening came like a shy novice about to take the veil of night. Night
blazed in moonlit splendour once more.

And at the hour when night stands still and dawn is not yet, the
waves, kindlier than before, carried him to the island of Ogygia,
where he heard the sea nymphs on the shore singing him a fairy
welcome.

Soft hands drew him from the deep, soft voices welcomed him; it seemed
as if one queenly presence, a tall woman with golden hair which shone,
towered among the rest, and he fell into a gentle swoon, a soft
surrender to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "We watch the fleeting isles of shade
      That float upon the sea
    When 'neath the sun some cloud hath spread
      His purple canopy.
    The woodbine odours scent the air,
      The cypress' leaves are wet
    From meadow springs that rise among
      Parsley and violet.
    Here shall the Wanderer remain;
      The land of Love's Delight;
    Shall here forget the past, the old
      Sad spectres of the night."

Soft and low the sea-maidens sang while Ulysses lay sleeping--even as
they had sung nine long years ago when the sea cast him up on the
shores of Calypso's kingdom.

It was bright sunlight, a great fire of cedar wood burnt on an altar
before the cave of the goddess who loved the hero, and the smoke
scented all the island.

Among the grove of stately trees which bordered the smooth pneumatic
lawn in front of the cave Ulysses lay sleeping on a bed of fresh-born
violets. A purple mantle shot with gold, woven by Calypso, was spread
over him.

The poplars and fragrant cypresses were full of sweet-voiced birds.

Over the mouth of the cave grew a great vine, and the black grapes
drooped and fell from it in their abundance.

From the centre of the short emerald grass four springs of clear water
came up in thin whips and flowed away in flashing rivulets.

This was the home and kingdom of the Goddess Calypso, and was so
beautiful a place that the fame of it had even reached Olympus, and
the gods knew of the island.

And nine long years had passed! It was nine years ago that the pale
gaunt waif of the sea--a sad jetsam!--had swooned upon the yellow
sand, while the bright-haired lady of Ogygia had gazed in wonder upon
him.

Circe had enthralled Ulysses for a year in her palace of wine and
sorcery and lust. That was a time of fierce sinful pleasures, of wild
deliriums.

The fire had blazed, burnt, and died away in that still marble house
in the wood.

But how different these nine dreamy years! The mild-eyed, loving
goddess lay in the hero's arms each night in tender love and sleep.
She was no Circe, but a lady of quieter delights. Her spell was upon
him, he was chained to her kind side by a magic influence, but she
loved him, and was no Circe.

Nine long years!

Those old valiant mariners from the plains of Troyland were only white
bones now, part of the sea-bed. They were far-off, remote, sweet sad
memories.

Calypso was the slow and gracious music to which his life moved now.
Often he doubted all the past. They were phantoms all those old
half-forgotten people.

So he lay sleeping among the violets. The scented wind gave a myriad
whispers to the poplars. The four springs sang a thin jocund song as
they burst from the dark rich earth into the sunshine, and within her
cave the goddess threw the golden shuttle and made a low crooning
music as she thought of her stately warrior hard by, and sent him
dreams of her white neck and wealth of golden hair.

She knew he would never leave her now. Her spells were too strong. Her
love too great.

During the first years he had been wont to wander away to a lonely
part of the shore. He would sit gazing with haunted eyes out over the
sea, and his thoughts went to Penelope, and he shed a tear for old
King Laertes and whispered to little Telemachus.

But that also was over for him now. Ithaca was but a misty cloud, and
the dear ones there but dreams in this island of dreams.

The face of Ulysses was changed. The hard lines of endeavour, the
brown painting of the wind, had gone from it. Noble and beautiful
still, but even in sleep it could be seen to have lost its force.

Suddenly, in the dim recesses of the grove, there was a silence. The
birds stopped singing, and the murmur of the insects droned, swelled
louder, and died away.

Nothing was heard for a moment but the trickle of the streams, and
then this also faded from sound.

By the side of the sleeping hero stood the tall white figure of
Athene. At her feet yellow flowers broke out like little flames, and
her deep, grave eyes were bent full upon Ulysses.

Perhaps he felt that unearthly majesty above him, for he turned and
moaned in his sleep.

The goddess, like a statue of white marble, stood looking down at him
for several moments. Then with a little sigh she stooped and touched
his forehead with her long slender fingers.

The birds began a full-throated ecstasy of song, which filled the wood
with a sound as of a myriad tiny flutes. The furry bees went swinging
through the sunlit grove with deep organ music, the shrill tinkle of
the streams sent its cool message once more into the hot swooning air.

Where the goddess had stood there was nothing but a clump of yellow
crocus and some violets more vivid than the rest.

Ulysses awoke with sudden stammerings like a frightened child. He
looked round him with strange troubled eyes.

Then slowly he rose up and walked through the wood towards the cave of
Calypso.

Forgotten fingers were upon the latch of his brain, old scenes began
to move through it in swift familiar panorama, he was as a man who
wakened from a sleep of years.

One word burst from his lips--"Penelope!" His face cleared as though a
mist had suddenly dispersed before it, and his walk quickened into a
firm, long stride as he came out on to the lawn.

He stopped short as he saw the mouth of the cave. Calypso was pacing
up and down with her sinuous graceful step, and at her side walked a
tall young man with a golden wand in his hand and winged sandals upon
his feet.

And Ulysses knew him for the God Hermes who had given him the sacred
herb in Circe's island and who had led him down the gloomy ways of
Hades.

They turned and came towards him.

"He will never wish to go, Hermes," he heard Calypso say as they drew
near.

"King," said the god, "I am come to you with a message from Father
Zeus. He hath seen you lying in this island with the goddess, and bids
me tell you of Ithaca and home once more, that your heart may beat
strong within you and you may adventure forth and find your wife
Penelope in your ancestral house. And the father promises you divine
protection. Your long wanderings shall be at an end, and you shall
come safely to the land of your heart's desire. Is it your will to go
and leave the lady?"

The goddess laughed a little musical laugh of certain triumph.

"Go!" she cried. "Ah, he will not go, Hermes. Could he not have left
me any time these nine long years of love? Go! No, my mariner loves
too well the soft couches of Ogygia, and these weak arms can yet hold
his wisdom captive. How will you answer, my heart's love?"

"To Ithaca?" said Ulysses.

"Yes, to Penelope thy wife, who sorroweth for thee and is in peril,"
answered the god.

A bright light flashed into Ulysses' eyes and his cheek was flushed
with hope.

"Now have I tarried too long in this place," he cried. "I know not
why, but never before has my heart burned within me as now. Yes, to
Ithaca! back to my father and my wife and the old hills of home! Zeus
be praised, for I who was asleep waken this day, and manhood is mine
once more."

Then Calypso drooped her lovely head like a tired flower as the God
Hermes flashed up into the sky like a beam of light.

"I see something of which I know not has come over you, lord of my
heart," she said sadly. "I have no more power, save only the power of
my deep love for you which you have forgotten. Who am I that I can
combat the will of Zeus or the hardness of your heart? I have loved
you well and cherished you, and shall I love you less now? No, I am no
cruel goddess. Go, and my heart be with you; and what power is mine to
aid you that shall you have. I doubt," she said, with a sudden burst
of anger, "I doubt you have some greater goddess than I at your side,
some lovelier lady, else how could my spell be broken? But now come
within and make a farewell feast with me. My heart is sick and I would
die. But one thing I can give you if you will not go. Would you be
immortal? Stay with your lover and that gift is yours. Never shall
death touch you or age. I am a goddess and can never die. Am I less
beautiful than Penelope, or less kind?"

Ulysses answered her pleadings slowly and painfully.

    [Illustration: "WHO AM I THAT I CAN COMBAT THE WILL OF ZEUS
      OR THE HARDNESS OF YOUR HEART?"
        _Page 78._]

"My queen and goddess, I know indeed that Penelope can never compare
with such immortal loveliness as yours. Yes, she will grow old and
wrinkled, and must die. Yet night and day all my heart must go out to
her, and I would endure a thousand storms and sorrows to see home once
more."

"Because of my great love for you, go, and may all the gods shower
blessings on you and protect you," she said in a low voice, and her
eyes were all blind with tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

On a red evening Calypso stood alone on a rock that jutted out into
the sea.

A black speck against the setting sun showed clear and far away.

Then the night fell, and she wandered weeping through her scented
avenues.

But her heart was away on the moaning sea, away with Ulysses the
departed.




THE LAST EPISODE

HOW THE KING CAME HOME AGAIN AFTER THE LONG YEARS


With the tears blinding his eyes, with shaking hands, speechless with
the happy thoughts surging in his brain, Ulysses knelt and kissed the
dear, dear shores of his own country.

The same rocky coasts, the same great mountain in the centre of the
island raising its head into the clouds, everywhere eternally the
same, and how beloved! was it not all mist and dreams--the long past?
How he heard the Sirens sing, seen the swaying arms of the foul
Scylla, and dwelt in love and slumber with Calypso?

And by his side once more stood the goddess, serene and beautiful in
her benevolent but awful calm. From her lips he had heard that here,
even here in his own land, in the fields of his inheritance, one more
supreme effort awaited him. He had learnt how his palace was full of
riotous princes, who wooed his wife, the Queen Penelope. He knew how
his son, the goodly Prince Telemachus, was least in his own house, and
how wild revel and wantonness ate up his substance. The queen in
peril! Penelope all but given up to the desires of lust and greed. All
his great heart burnt with anger and hate against the suitors, and
yet, with a strange dual emotion, beat high with pride for his dear
and stainless lady, who still mourned for her husband, and longed
against hope for his return.

He kissed the kindly home-ground, and at that sacred contact a sense
of strength and power came to him, a god-like power, that in all his
long toils and wanderings he had never known before.

He became conscious that Athene was speaking to him. "And remember
ever, my Ulysses, that now thou hast need of all thy wit and cunning.
In all the chances of thy life before never hadst thou need to walk as
warily as now. For mere strength and valour unallied to wisdom and
cunning will avail one nothing against the hundred. But at the hour of
need I will be once more with thee if thou doest well and wisely.
Courage! son of Laertes! 'tis but a little while till the end. Let not
thy love and hate master thee until the appointed hour. And now, that
thou mayest walk in thy palace and groves unknown for who thou art, I
give thee a disguise. And so farewell until the hour of triumph."

She stretched out her spear over the kneeling king. The firm flesh
dried and wrinkled upon his arms and legs. His hair shrivelled up into
grey sparseness and his eyes dimmed. He wore a tattered cloak, a thing
of shreds and patches, and an old beggar's staff of ilex was in his
hand.

But beneath this seeming age and weakness was hidden the true hero as
strong and cunning as before.

The goddess turned into light and was no more, and with slow, tottering
footsteps Ulysses took a lonely way among the well-remembered paths of
his native hills.

After an hour's travelling he came out on a smooth pasture land, with
a little homestead nestling among a clump of trees. His heart beat
eagerly within him, for if perchance after these long years farmer
Eumæus still lived, here he might gain news of his palace and perhaps
a friend.

Eumæus was once the steward of the estates and a very faithful servant
of his master. Ulysses approached the house. In front was a large
courtyard, made by a fence of oak and hawthorn boughs, and within were
twelve great pens for swine.

And in the porch sat old Eumæus himself making himself a pair of
sandals, hardly changed in a single feature, though perhaps his eyes
were not so bright as in the old times.

Hearing footsteps, the four fierce dogs which herded the swine rushed
out of the yard and leapt angrily at the newcomer. He might have fared
badly, for the great beasts were lean and evil-tempered, had not the
swineherd ran out to his help and drew them off with curses.

    [Illustration: "NAY, IF YOU LOVE ME," HE SAID, "NONE OF THAT,
      MY FRIEND."]

He turned to Ulysses. "Thank the gods, old fellow," he cried, "that I
was near by. A little more and you would have been torn to pieces,
and then you would be in an evil plight but I a worse! Dead would you
be and past caring, but I should be disgraced. Heaven knows, I have
enough trouble to bear. Here's my lawful master gone in foreign parts
these long years--dead as like as not--and I sit here feeding swine
for them that are but little better themselves. But come in, come in,
old shrew. There's a bite of food for you within, which you need I
make no doubt, and then you can tell me your story, for I am a lonely
man now and like a crack of talk as well as most."

The garrulous old fellow pushed him in with busy geniality and sat him
down on the goatskin, which was his bed. Then he fetched what meat and
wine he could furnish, and they sat down to a frugal meal.

"What, then, about this lord of yours?" said Ulysses. "I myself have
wandered far these last years. Perhaps I may have met with him, and
can give you news."

The swineherd chuckled.

"Nay, if you love me," he said, "none of that, my friend. Why, every
dirty old man as comes along this way has some such tale to tell. And
then my poor lady up in the palace--the gods save her!--she takes them
in and gives them a new cloak or what not, and believes all they say
until the next one comes along. No! my dear lord is dead and never
shall I look upon the like of him again. By Zeus! but he was a man if
you like!"

"Well, my host, we shall see in the future," said Ulysses, in so
significant a tone that the swineherd was startled for a moment.

The wind had arisen and it was a black stormy night so they went to
rest early, and Eumæus slept soundly till dawn. But all through the
silent hours the brain of Ulysses worked like a shuttle in a loom.

At breakfast-time, while the swineherd was preparing the meal, the
dogs began to bark loudly outside, but in a welcome manner, saluting
one whom they knew.

Footsteps were heard crossing the yard, and a tall young man with the
first down of manhood on his lip stood in the doorway.

Eumæus dropped the bowls in which he had been mixing the wine with a
sudden clatter and ran towards the stranger.

"My young lord," he cried, "oh, my young lord, the sight of you is a
welcome one to weary eyes. Come within my poor place. This is but a
poor old man who shelters with me for a day or two. Don't mind him, my
lord."

It was Telemachus the son of Ulysses.

The king rose humbly and offered his seat to his son.

"Keep your place, old man," said the prince. "The swineherd will find
me another. And who may you be, and what do you in Ithaca?"

Then Ulysses told him a long story. He said that he was a Cretan, and
had fought at Troy and was now destitute and a wanderer.

"Could you not take him to the palace, my lord?" said Eumæus.
"Perhaps he might find some work there."

"I will clothe him, and arm him with a sword, and give him a little to
help him on his way," said Telemachus, "and that most gladly. But I
cannot take him to the palace. The suitors would ill-use him because
of his age, perhaps they would kill him for sport. I cannot restrain
them; I am young; and what is one against so many? Moreover, so great
is the hate they bear towards me, they would surely slay any guest of
mine."

Then Ulysses rose from his seat and bowed. "Lord," he said, "if I may
dare to speak and you will hear, I say foul wrong is wrought against
you in your palace, and my blood rages when I think of it."

"Old fellow, you are right enough," said the boy, sadly. "Oh, for my
dead sire! to sweep these dogs from Ithaca!"

"Yes, the king!" said Eumæus, with a deep sigh.

Suddenly Ulysses saw the tall figure of Athene was standing by his
side.

The other two were looking towards him, but could see nothing of her
presence. The goddess looked at him with kindly eyes and touched him
with her spear.

Telemachus and Eumæus crouched trembling and speechless against the
furthest side of the hut.

The bronze came back to the face of the king, his hair fell from his
head in all its old luxuriance, his figure filled out, and he stood
before them in his full stature and all the glory of his manhood.

Eumæus fell upon his knees and covered his eyes with his hand.

"A god! a god!" he cried, "a god has come to us! Hail, oh Immortal
One, guest of my poor homestead!"

Telemachus knelt also. "Oh, Divine stranger, a boon! Tell me of my
dear father, if indeed he lives and knows of the peril of his house.
And will he ever come back to sit in his own chair and rule?"

Then Ulysses stepped to his son and caught him in his arms and kissed
him.

"Telemachus! Telemachus!" he said, "no god am I, but your own dear
father come home at last, and I am come with doom and death for the
insolent ones about my board!"

And when they had all three mingled their happy tears, Telemachus
said, "Father, I know how great a warrior you are, and all the world
rings with the wisdom and valour of your deeds. But we two can never
fight against so many. In all, the princes number a hundred and a
score of men; and they are all trained fighting men, the best from
Ithaca and all the neighbouring islands. We must have other aid."

"Comfort yourself, son," said Ulysses. "Aid we have, and the mightiest
of all. Athene herself watches over my fortunes and will come in the
hour of need. She has brought me hither and given me this disguise,
and in all the coming contest her voice will help and her arm be for
us. Should we need more aid than that?"

"Truly, my father," said the boy, "we are well favoured, and my heart
leaps within me at what is to come."

As he finished speaking, once more the manhood of Ulysses left him and
only a poor old beggar man stood before the swineherd and the prince.

"Now will we go to the palace," said Ulysses. "I shall seem but a poor
old beggar man, and however the princes may ill-use me I shall do
nothing till the time has come and we are ready, and I charge you, my
son, and my good friend Eumæus, that you do nothing to protect me
however I am treated. You may check them by words if you can, but no
more. And not even the queen herself must know that the king has come
home again.

"And now let us go. The judge is set, the doom begun; none shall stay
it!"

And the three went out from the hut over the mountain paths towards
the palace.

       *       *       *       *       *

The revel was at its height in the courtyard of the palace. Stone
seats ran round the wall which enclosed the buildings. Over a low
colonnade the orchard trees drooped into the court, and a huge vine
trailed its weight of fruit over the marble.

The hot afternoon sun sent a vivid colour over everything. Beyond the
palace the blue mountains towered into a sky of deeper blue. Purple
shadows from the buildings lay upon the white marble, and the long
light glittered on a great table piled with golden cups and bowls,
holding the _débris_ of the feast.

A wild uproar and shouting filled the air.

The court was filled with whirling figures of men and girls half drunk
with wine and excitement as they moved in the figures of a lascivious
dance.

All the household girls were there with the suitors joining in the
feast, and peals of laughter shivered through the sunny air.

Telemachus sat on a seat apart watching the revel with keen eyes.
There was a repressed excitement in his face and an eager regard. One
of the girls noticed it as she strolled past. She was a slight, fair
wanton creature with a mocking smile.

"How, Lord Telemachus?" she said, laughing lightly, "are you not going
to join us in the fun? You make a sorry host indeed! Is not this your
palace, and do you leave us without your countenance. Oh, shame upon
you for a laggard youth when wine and kisses wait you."

She made an impudent grimace at him and flitted past. But a short time
back he would have raged at this impudent salutation from a pretty
slave girl who drew a confident strength from the protection of his
enemies. But now he hardly heard her, but leant forward again in the
attitude of one who watches and waits.

Outside the palace gate, on the hot white road, two old men were
approaching. One was the swineherd Eumæus and the other a wandering
beggar man.

Just by the threshold of the courtyard an old lean dog, very grey and
feeble, lay upon a heap of dung in the sunlight. The mailed
horse-flies hovered round him in swarms, but he seemed too weak to
drive them away. As the beggar approached he threw his muzzle up into
the air with a quick movement. His sightless eyes turned towards the
advancing footsteps. With a great effort he scrambled to his feet. The
lean tail wagged in tremulous joy, the scarred ears were pricked in
welcome.

He stumbled to the feet of Ulysses. When he touched him the old dog
lay down in the dust and with a long sigh he died.

And this was the first welcome the king had to his palace, and as he
went in through the gates his eyes were wet with tears.

When Telemachus saw the steward he beckoned him to the table and sat
beside him while he ate. But Ulysses crouched down by the threshold.
Telemachus gave bread and meat to the swineherd.

"Go, Eumæus," he said aloud, "give these broken meats to that poor old
beggar man by the gate, and tell him from me that if he lacks he
should be bold and go to the princes and ask them for alms. By Zeus!
he will never grow fat if he crouches by the door there!"

Ulysses took the food with a low bow and packed it away in his
wallet.

He rose up grasping his staff, and went tottering among the suitors.
His lean arms and furrowed, wrinkled face were so piteous, his whining
appeal full of such misery, that many of the princes tossed him
something.

At the head of the table a tall and splendid young man was sitting. He
was richly dressed in a showy, ostentatious manner. His florid,
handsome face wore a perpetual and evil sneer. His grey eyes were
ill-tempered and quarrelsome.

"By the gods, my friends," he cried, with a sneer, "how tender-hearted
and compassionate you are grown! With what lavishness do you bestow
the wealth of Ulysses, or rather of the queen, upon this old
scarecrow. Such old beasts are no use in this world. Get you gone, you
old dog!"

With that he hurled a three-legged stool at Ulysses. The stool struck
him a heavy blow on his side.

For a moment the black turmoil in the hero's heart was almost
irrepressible. But with an enormous effort of will he overcame it. He
stood quite still, with his head sunk upon his breast in humility.

Now came the girls from out of the house carrying great jars of fresh
wine, and copper bowls of water for the mixing, which they put upon
the table.

Here was better sport than an old beggar and his woes, and Ulysses
moved aside and was forgotten.

But one of the girls touched him on the shoulder. "Wanderer," said
she, "the Queen Penelope has seen how Antinous used you from her room
within the hall, and she sends me to summon you to her, for she would
speak to you."

Then, with beating heart and footsteps which trembled with no
simulated age, the king followed the girl over the threshold of his
own palace.

As he was walking towards the chamber of the queen an old woman came
towards them, a very old woman with a lined brown face and little,
brilliant twinkling eyes.

"Poor old man," she said, "it is a shame that they should use your
grey hairs so, and abuse the hospitality which is the sacred right of
strangers. My lady Penelope sends me to you, and bids me wash your
feet in this bowl of water, so that we may purge our house of the
stain the prince without has cast upon it. Sit on this stool and I
will lave ye."

So the old nurse Euryclea bathed the feet of her master whom she had
dandled in her arms as a child. Suddenly Ulysses made as though he
would draw away his foot. He remembered that on his leg he bore a
strange-shaped scar made by a savage boar when he was a boy, and he
feared the wise old woman would know him by that mark.

But as she passed her hand along his ankle she touched the mark and
turned his foot towards the light and saw it. She dropped his foot
quickly, and the basin was overturned and the water ran away over the
marble floor. She looked up into the king's face and knew him for all
his disguise.

In a fierce, hurried whisper he bade her be silent for her life and
his and the queen's safety. As she vowed, trembling, by Zeus and the
gods, to do his bidding, a trumpet snarled suddenly outside on the
steps of the palace.

The riot without died into silence.

The clear cold voice of a herald began to speak.

Thus says the Queen Penelope: "To-morrow will I make an end of all. In
the forenoon I will choose from among the princes whom I will wed. Too
long have ye rioted within the palace and eaten up the substance of
myself and my son. I am aweary. And since there is no other way,
to-morrow I will choose. Ye shall take the great bow of the King
Ulysses from its cover. And he who can shoot an arrow through twelve
axes in a row--even as Ulysses was wont to do--him will I wed."

"Nurse!" whispered Ulysses, "the king will be here before any can bend
that bow. Now go into the queen and tell her that the old man is sick
and begs leave to wait upon her another time. And comfort her with an
omen that you have seen, but tell her nothing. And now farewell. There
is much to do ere dawn."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a silence of consternation in the great banqueting hall of
the palace.

Penelope from her seat upon the raised steps beneath the
richly-decorated wall at the end smiled faintly to herself.

The twelve axes stood in a row, driven into sockets in the pavement.
The suitors stood in two long rows on either side.

Antinous, the strongest of them all, held a great polished bow. His
face blazed with anger and was red with shame.

All eyes were centred on him. No one saw old Eumæus steal out into the
porch and silently lower the heavy bars of the door and lash them
tight with cords.

"Ah!" cried Antinous, "I know now why neither any of you nor I myself
can bend this bow. It is not the great strength of Ulysses, for I am
stronger than he ever was. This is Apollo's festival, the Archer-God,
and it is useless to strive to bend this bow to-day. Let us sacrifice
to Helios to-day, and then to-morrow come again to the trial."

Then the old beggar man came forward.

"My lords," he said, "I pray you give me the bow, since you have done
your trial for to-day. I was once strong in my youth. Let me have this
honour."

Antinous scowled at him, and stepped toward him to strike such
insolence, but the clear voice of Penelope called sharply down the
lane of men,--

"Who insults even the meanest in my palace? Have more regard, sir, for
I am still queen here. Give the old man the bow since that is his
whim."

Antinous was cowed, but still murmured, when Telemachus stepped
quickly up to him. The boy seemed taller, his eyes shone with a cold,
fierce light they had never seen in them before. His voice rang with a
new authority.

"Be silent, sir!" he said in a keen, threatening voice. "The bow is
mine, and mine alone, to give or refuse as I decide. Mother, the trial
is over for to-day. Go with your maidens into your own chamber. I will
see to this old man, and I am master here and will be so."

With a frightened pride and wonder the queen withdrew.

The suitors began to whisper to each other, wondering what this might
mean. Their confidence seemed to be slipping away from them. Each and
all felt uneasy. There was some strange influence in the air which
sapped their courage and silenced the loud insolent words which were
ever on their lips.

The shadow of death was creeping into the hall.

The great marble room suddenly grew cold. The old beggar came up to
the splendid Antinous and took the bow from his unresisting hand.

As he plucked the string the gods spake at last. A crash of thunder
pealed among them. There was a moment's silence, and then the
bow-string rang beneath the hero's touch as clear as the note of a
swallow.

And in a strange light, which glowed out from the walls and great
pillars of bronze, the princes saw no beggar, but a noble form with
bronzed face and flashing eyes, and they knew the king had come home
again.

Ulysses motioned to his son, and Telemachus drew his sword and with a
great shout rushed up the hall after his father.

They turned and stood on the steps.

An arrow sang like a flying wasp, and Antinous lay dying on the floor.

Then the princes rushed to the walls where their armour and swords
were wont to hang, but all the pegs were bare.

Only above the steps where Ulysses stood were three spears and three
shields, and as they gazed in cold fear Eumæus leapt upon the steps
and the three girded on the armour.

Again the great bow sang, and Amphinomus lay dead.

Then Telemachus with a great shout drove his spear through the fat
Ctessipus, and he fell gurgling his life away.

But one of the suitors, Melanthius, climbed up a pillar through one of
the lanterns of the hall and clambered over the roofs to the armoury
unseen by Ulysses.

And while the deadly arrows sped with bitter mocking words towards the
cowering throng, he gathered a great sheaf of spears and flung them
down among his comrades.

They seized upon the spears with a fierce cry of joy, and Ulysses'
heart failed him where he stood for there were still many living.

They began to run up the hall towards the steps.

Then at last Athene saw that her time had come, and she lifted her
terrible war shield which brings death to the sons of men.

And the flight of spears all went far wide of the mark, and some fell
with a rattle upon the floor.

With one cry of triumph the king leapt like light among the crowd.
Hither and there flashed the three swords like swooping vultures, and
Athene took all power from the princes, and one by one they screamed
and met their doom.

And soon the din of battle died away, and save for a faint moaning the
hall was silent.

And the princes, the pride of the islands, lay fallen in dust and
blood, heaped one on the other, like a great catch of fishes turned
out from a fisherman's nets upon the shore.

Eumæus went to the door of the hall and cut the lashings, and raised
the bars so that the sunlight came slanting in great beams. The dust
danced in the light rays like a powder of tiny lives.

Then Ulysses called the servants and bade them carry the bodies away.
And he ordered Euryclea to wash the blood-stained floors, and to bring
sulphur and torches that the place might be purified.

And that night great beacons flared on the hills, and far out to sea
the fishermen saw them and said, "Surely the king has come home
again."

And while the music rang though the lighted palace and the people
passed before the gates shouting for joy, old Euryclea spread the
marriage bed of the king by the light of flaming torches.

And when all was prepared, the old nurse went to Ulysses and Penelope
and led them to the door of the marriage chamber, as she had led them
twenty years before.

Then the music ceased in the palace halls and silence fell over all
the house.




A NOTE ON HOMER AND ULYSSES


The uncertainty which prevails as to the actual birthplace of Homer
also extends to the exact period at which he flourished. Doubts have
been expressed by some modern scholars as to whether the poet ever
existed as a personality. The view that the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ were
not the work of an individual, but merely a collection of old folklore
verse welded into a whole by many hands, made compact by ages, a
self-born epic rising from crystallised tradition, is, however, not a
tenable one, and need not be discussed here.

As far as we are able to place the poet in his period correctly, we
can say with some certainty that he flourished at a time between 800
and 900 years before the birth of Christ.

The Arundelian marbles fix his era at 907 years before the dawn of
Christianity. About the life of the most ancient of all poets nothing
whatever is known. There is a tradition that he had a school of
followers in the Island of Chios, and we have early records of
celebrations held there in his honour every few years. But no proof
whatever exists of the truth of the supposition, though up to quite
modern times the islanders maintained and believed in it.

In the same way must be treated the story of Homer's blindness. It is
a legend which cannot be proved or disproved. Yet at a time when
literature must have been almost purely oral, his blindness need have
been no bar to the exercise of his talent. It has been said, and the
theory is at least an interesting one, that the music and sonance of
Homer's lines came from the fact that they were composed to be
_spoken_ rather than _read_. That the blindness of Milton did not in
any way detract from the grandeur of his verse is an undoubted fact,
and yet Milton had to _speak_ every line before he could have it
recorded by others.

We can deduce something of Homer from his work. That he must have been
a travelled man seems indubitable. To this day the modern Ulysses or
Menelaus, standing on the bridge of his tramp steamer, can see the
headlands, islands, and capes, unchanged from 3000 years ago. That
Homer was a man of deep feeling, was possessed of the "artistic
temperament" in a very marked degree, seems equally clear. Nothing can
be more delicate and touching than his handling of Penelope. Other
ancient writers have represented the wife of Ulysses as an abandoned
harlot, and said that her husband repudiated her for incontinence
during his absence. Homer, with a far surer, finer touch, made her a
model for wives to emulate and husbands to desire. The whole of the
home-coming scenes in the _Odyssey_ could only have been written by a
man who was no mere materialist.

When Homer wrote, human nature was much less profound a thing than it
has since become. And yet, though men's motives were entirely
different, men's actions sprang from less subtle causes than now.
Homer was a psychologist of the first class. He knew his fellow-men.
In all Romance no one can point to a finer and more consistent
character-study than that of Ulysses. Shakespeare has drawn no more
vivid picture of a single temperament. Homer must have mixed with
mankind, observed them closely, been an acute and untiring observer.

The absolutely original temper of his mind is extraordinary. For we
must remember that Homer could hardly have had any models to inform
his choice of subjects or direct his style. Yet none of his
imitators, and there have been many, were able, even in their
happiest moments, even to approach him. As he was the first poet, so
he was the greatest, and we may well conclude he will remain so until
men themselves are things of the past.

In the ancient world, when we get into the actual periods of recorded
history, we find a worship of Homer universally existing. His works
reposed under the pillow of Alexander together with the sword which
had made him great. The conqueror enshrined the _Iliad_ in the richest
casket of the vanquished Persian king. Altars smoked in Homer's honour
all over Greece, he was venerated as a god. But speculations about
Homer have, after all, but little value. We know nothing, and we shall
never now know anything about him.

He remains a glorious and mysterious fact. We have the priceless
legacy of this Being, and that is enough.


ULYSSES

Even Euclid, the inventor of concrete logical processes, is forced to
begin with axioms and definitions that are absurd. Once allow them,
and everything proceeds to a brilliant triumph of mentality; but in
order to build a basis in a vacuum, one has to swallow a dose of
nonsense first.

It must be confessed that in order to estimate the character-drawing
employed by Homer to create Ulysses, we must swallow the supernatural
influences which surrounded him. Put them out of the question and the
hero lacks perspective and becomes a doll. Let it be granted that
Minerva stood beside the wanderer. "Her clear and bared limbs
o'erthwarted with the brazen-headed spear." Let us but believe with
Homer that the careless Gods lie beside their nectar on the hill, and
hurl their bolts far below into the valleys of men, then the man
Ulysses shines out clear and full of colour, an absolute achievement
in Art.

An ancient Norse pick-axe has been discovered, bearing the following
inscription:--

    "_Either I will find a way or make one_,"

and a broken helmet was once found in Battle Abbey, engraved with this
crest:--

    "_L'espoir est ma force._"

The Master Mariner might have owned them both. The first quality which
we marvel at in our analysis of Ulysses' character is the
extraordinary _resource_ which he displays throughout all his
wanderings. His qualities of passive endurance, his enormous courage,
his mental agility--the very cream of cunning, are all component parts
of his unfailing readiness to take sudden advantage of his
opportunity. For him all tides were at flood to lead on to fortune.

Charybdis sucks down his stout ship into the womb of the sea, he makes
a raft of the restored keel.

He estimates the brain power of the stupid Cyclops at its exact value,
and escapes the vengeance of his companions by a pun. And there is a
well-defined touch of fatalism in Ulysses also. When the irreparable
blunder has been committed by his sailors, and Apollo's sacred beeves
are smoking on the spit, he knows that he and all his men must pay
heavily for their disregard of Circe's warning. It is inevitable.
Nothing can turn aside the coming anger of the Sun-God. So Ulysses,
being hungry, though innocent of the initial sacrilege, makes his
unhallowed meal with the rest. He must endure the pain, so plucks the
pelf also. To enlarge upon his courage and endurance were unnecessary.
The _Odyssey_ is one long pæan of them both. His sagacity is manifest
so vividly in all his actions that even Zeus, father of Heaven, says
to Athene, "_No, daughter, I could never forget Ulysses, the wisest
worldling of them all_." But what of Ulysses as a Sybarite? The hero
"Mulierose," to borrow from the _Cloister and the Hearth_, the lover
of ladies, "propt on beds of amaranth and moly," while white enchanted
arms hold him a willing captive? I have heard it remarked that here
the Ionian father of poets has gone astray. People have said to me
that Ulysses loved his wife too well to dwell contented on the spicy
downs of Lotos Land, that he was too taut and hardy a man. But Homer
did not err in his study of temperament.

How can one judge the man of 3000 years ago by the standards of
to-day? In the ages when hosts joined in battle for the fair body of
Helen men looked on women with other eyes than ours. Heaven and hell
were very material places, pleasure was a very material, tangible,
understandable thing and a lovely woman a gift from the Gods.

Ulysses strove for Ithaca through storm and wrack, and when Fortune
sent him to Calypso, or beached his ship on Circe's fairy isle, he was
content to rest a little while. He yielded, like others of the wise.
Socrates studied under Aspasia, and Aspasia ruled the world under the
name of Pericles.

It is in trying to fit the temperament of an ancient to a modern that
the majority of people must always fail to understand a great piece of
contemporary literature. One may sift the instances of modern
temperament and comment on them, but one should not try to mould the
residue into a like form. The Bible story paints King David, for
example, as a truculent, bloodthirsty, canting monster--a complete
portrait. The immorality and stupidity lies in trying to reconcile his
Old Testament enormities with the revelations of the New.

So with Ulysses, Circe, Calypso, Nausicaa, and even in later years the
legendary Erippe, all fall truly, artistically and naturally into the
mosaic of the hero's life.

One interesting point in the pleasure-loving side of Ulysses' nature
should by no means be disregarded. Not only did he take eagerly such
joys as the Fates apportioned, but he was a true and discriminating
Sybarite.

We find him taking stringent precautions against disaster from the
Sirens, yet determined to enjoy the luxury of their song. It is a
pleasure not to be missed and not to be paid for. In after years we
may imagine him relating his unique and delicious experience to his
friends with an undoubted complacency.

In the commendable and ancient virtues of filial love, a cardinal
virtue in the old world, a forgotten duty to-day, Ulysses was
singularly strong. His tenderest inquiries in Hades, the most
passionate expressions of affection, are protested to the shade of
Anticlea, his mother. One of the most touching scenes in the _Odyssey_
is the meeting between Ulysses and Laertes, his father, after the long
wanderings are over. "_He flung his arms around his father and cried
out, 'Oh, my father, I am here indeed once more. I have come back to
you at last! Dry your tears, for mine is the victory.'_"

A many-sided man. Hard as a diamond and as bright, with every facet in
his many-sided nature cut and polished by the hand of a master.

                                                    C. R. G.


THE END

_Colston & Coy, Limited, Printers, Edinburgh_




    _ADVERTISEMENT_


    BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT

    [Decoration]

    TO HIS MAJESTY THE KING


    W. CLARKSON

    THEATRICAL COSTUMIER AND PERRUQUIER

    WIGS, COSTUMES, MASKS, LIMELIGHT
    SCENERY AND PROPERTIES

    Amateur Theatricals and Tableaux Vivants attended in
    town or country on most reasonable terms

    Thoroughly competent men sent with every
    Requisite

    [Decoration]

    [Decoration] Clarkson's Lillie Powder [Decoration]

    In Three Shades--BLANCHE, NATURELLE, RACHEL
    1s. per box; 1s. 3d. post free

    Used by Mrs Langtry and all the leading
    ladies of the theatrical profession

    [Decoration]

    W. CLARKSON
    45 & 44 WELLINGTON ST., STRAND
    [Decoration] LONDON, W.C.




Transcriber's Note

The author's surname is hyphenated throughout this book, although the
Library of Congress lists his name without the hyphen.

The author varies slightly from _The Odyssey_ in places--for instance,
the number of years Ulysses remains with Calypso. These variations are
preserved as written.

There is no page number reference on the illustration facing page 83.

The author uses some variant spelling which is preserved as printed.
This includes Phoeacians, Vergil, Melesegenes, dogrells, both Græcian
and Grecian, and both lotos and lotus. These latter two variations
appear in different sections of the book, so may well be deliberate on
the part of the author.

Minor punctuation errors have been repaired. The following amendments
have also been made:

    Page 10--discrimena amended to discrimina--Per varios casus
    per tot discrimina rerum ...

    Page 32--smiled amended to smile--A cruel smile played on his
    face.

    Page 74--ago years amended to years ago--It was nine years ago
    that the pale gaunt waif of the sea ...

    Page 94--iufluence amended to influence--There was some
    strange influence in the air ...


Title: The Iliad

Author: Homer

Translator: Edward, Earl of Derby

Release Date: November 19, 2002 [eBook #6150]
[Most recently updated: February 5, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***




The Iliad

by Homer

Rendered into English Blank verse by
Edward, Earl of Derby




Contents

 PREFACE.
 BOOK I.
 BOOK II.
 BOOK III.
 BOOK IV.
 BOOK V.
 BOOK VI.
 BOOK VII.
 BOOK VIII.
 BOOK IX.
 BOOK X.
 BOOK XI.
 BOOK XII.
 BOOK XIII.
 BOOK XIV.
 BOOK XV.
 BOOK XVI.
 BOOK XVII.
 BOOK XVIII.
 BOOK XIX.
 BOOK XX.
 BOOK XXI.
 BOOK XXII.
 BOOK XXIII.
 BOOK XXIV.




PREFACE.

In the spring of 1862 I was induced, at the request of some personal
friends, to print, for private circulation only, a small volume of
“Translations of Poems Ancient and Modern,” in which was included the
first Book of the Iliad. The opinions expressed by some competent
judges of the degree of success which had attended this “attempt to
infuse into an almost literal English version something of the spirit,
as well as the simplicity, of the great original,” [Footnote:
Introduction to unpublished volume.] were sufficiently favourable to
encourage me to continue the work which I had begun. It has afforded
me, in the intervals of more urgent business, an unfailing, and
constantly increasing source of interest; and it is not without a
feeling of regret at the completion of my task, and a sincere
diffidence as to its success, that I venture to submit the result of my
labour to the ordeal of public criticism.

Various causes, irrespective of any demerits of the work itself, forbid
me to anticipate for this translation any extensive popularity. First,
I fear that the taste for, and appreciation of, Classical Literature,
are greatly on the decline; next, those who have kept up their
classical studies, and are able to read and enjoy the original, will
hardly take an interest in a mere translation; while the English
reader, unacquainted with Greek, will naturally prefer the harmonious
versification and polished brilliancy of Pope’s translation; with
which, as a happy adaptation of the Homeric story to the spirit of
English poetry, I have not the presumption to enter into competition.
But, admirable as it is, Pope’s Iliad can hardly be said to be Homer’s
Iliad; and there may be some who, having lost the familiarity with the
original language which they once possessed, may, if I have at all
succeeded in my attempt, have recalled to their minds a faint echo of
the strains which delighted their earlier days, and may recognize some
slight trace of the original perfume.

Numerous as have been the translators of the Iliad, or of parts of it,
the metres which have been selected have been almost as various: the
ordinary couplet in rhyme, the Spenserian stanza, the Trochaic or
Ballad metre, all have had their partisans, even to that “pestilent
heresy” of the so-called English Hexameter; a metre wholly repugnant to
the genius of our language; which can only be pressed into the service
by a violation of every rule of prosody; and of which, notwithstanding
my respect for the eminent men who have attempted to naturalize it, I
could never read ten lines without being irresistibly reminded of
Canning’s

“Dactylics call’st thou them? God help thee, silly one!”


But in the progress of this work, I have been more and more confirmed
in the opinion which I expressed at its commencement, that (whatever
may be the extent of my own individual failure) “if justice is ever to
be done to the easy flow and majestic simplicity of the grand old Poet,
it can only be in the Heroic blank verse.” I have seen isolated
passages admirably rendered in other metres; and there are many
instances in which a translation line for line and couplet for couplet
naturally suggests itself, and in which it is sometimes difficult to
avoid an involuntary rhyme; but the blank verse appears to me the only
metre capable of adapting itself to all the gradations, if I may use
the term, of the Homeric style; from the finished poetry of the
numerous similes, in which every touch is nature, and nothing is
overcoloured or exaggerated, down to the simple, almost homely, style
of some portions of the narrative. Least of all can any other metre do
full justice to the spirit and freedom of the various speeches, in
which the old warriors give utterance, without disguise or restraint,
to all their strong and genuine emotions. To subject these to the
trammels of couplet and rhyme would be as destructive of their chief
characteristics, as the application of a similar process to the
Paradise Lost of Milton, or the tragedies of Shakespeare; the effect
indeed may be seen by comparing, with some of the noblest speeches of
the latter, the few couplets which he seems to have considered himself
bound by custom to tack on to their close, at the end of a scene or an
act.

I have adopted, not without hesitation, the Latin, rather than the
Greek, nomenclature for the Heathen Deities. I have been induced to do
so from the manifest incongruity of confounding the two; and from the
fact that though English readers may be familiar with the names of
Zeus, or Aphrodite, or even Poseidon, those of Hera, or Ares, or
Hephaestus, or Leto, would hardly convey to them a definite
signification.

It has been my aim throughout to produce a translation and not a
paraphrase; not indeed such a translation as would satisfy, with regard
to each word, the rigid requirements of accurate scholarship; but such
as would fairly and honestly give the sense and spirit of every
passage, and of every line; omitting nothing, and expanding nothing;
and adhering, as closely as our language will allow, ever to every
epithet which is capable of being translated, and which has, in the
particular passage, anything of a special and distinctive character. Of
the many deficiencies in my execution of this intention, I am but too
conscious; whether I have been in any degree successful, must be left
to the impartial decision of such of the Public as may honour this work
with their perusal.

D.


KNOWSLEY, OCT., 1864

NOTE TO THE FIFTH EDITION.


The favourable reception which has been given to the first Editions of
this work, far exceeding my most sanguine hopes, affords a gratifying
proof how far, in my preface, I had overrated the extent to which the
taste for, and appreciation of, Classical Literature had declined. It
will not, I hope, be thought extraordinary that some errors and
inaccuracies should have found their way into a translation executed, I
must admit, somewhat hastily, and with less of the “limae labor” than I
should have bestowed upon it, had I ventured to anticipate for it so
extensive a circulation. My thanks, therefore, are due to those
critics, who, either publicly or privately, have called my attention to
passages in which the sense of the Author has been either incorrectly
or imperfectly rendered. All of these I have examined, and have availed
myself of several of the suggestions offered for their correction; and
a careful revision of the whole work, and renewed comparison with the
original, have enabled me to discover other defects, the removal of
which will, I hope, render the present Edition, especially in the eyes
of Classical Scholars, somewhat more worthy of the favour which has
been accorded to its predecessors.

D.


ST. JAMES’S SQUARE, May, 1885.



ARGUMENT.

THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.


In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseis and
Briseis, allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles.
Chryses, the father of Chryseis, and priest of Apollo, comes to the
Grecian camp to ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in
the tenth year of the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently
dismissed by Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god, who
inflicts a pestilence on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and
encourages Calchas to declare the cause of it, who attributes it to the
refusal of Chryseis. The King being obliged to send back his captive,
enters into a furious contest with Achilles, which Nestor pacifies;
however, as he had the absolute command of the army, he seizes on
Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and his
forces from the rest of the Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, she
supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of the wrong done to her
son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter granting her suit,
incenses Juno, between whom the debate runs high, till they are
reconciled by the address of Vulcan.

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book; nine during
the plague, one in the council and quarrel of the Princes, and twelve
for Jupiter’s stay among the Ethiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers
her petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to
Chrysa, and lastly to Olympus.

BOOK I.

Of Peleus’ son, Achilles, sing, O Muse,
The vengeance, deep and deadly; whence to Greece
Unnumbered ills arose; which many a soul
Of mighty warriors to the viewless shades
Untimely sent; they on the battle plain
Unburied lay, a prey to rav’ning dogs,
And carrion birds; but so had Jove decreed,
From that sad day when first in wordy war,
The mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Confronted stood by Peleus’ godlike son.

Say then, what God the fatal strife provok’d?
Jove’s and Latona’s son; he, filled with wrath
Against the King, with deadly pestilence
The camp afflicted,—and the people died,—
For Chryses’ sake, his priest, whom Atreus’ son
With scorn dismiss’d, when to the Grecian ships
He came, his captive daughter to redeem,
With costly ransom charg’d; and in his hand
The sacred fillet of his God he bore,
And golden staff; to all he sued, but chief
To Atreus’ sons, twin captains of the host:
“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
May the great Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
Grant you yon hostile city to destroy,
And home return in safety; but my child
Restore, I pray; her proffer’d ransom take,
And in his priest, the Lord of Light revere.”

Then through the ranks assenting murmurs ran,
The priest to rev’rence, and the ransom take:
Not so Atrides; he, with haughty mien,
And bitter speech, the trembling sire address’d:
“Old man, I warn thee, that beside our ships
I find thee not, or ling’ring now, or back
Returning; lest thou prove of small avail
Thy golden staff, and fillet of thy God.
Her I release not, till her youth be fled;
Within my walls, in Argos, far from home,
Her lot is cast, domestic cares to ply,
And share a master’s bed. For thee, begone!
Incense me not, lest ill betide thee now.”

He said: the old man trembled, and obeyed;
Beside the many-dashing Ocean’s shore
Silent he pass’d; and all apart, he pray’d
To great Apollo, fair Latona’s son:

“Hear me, God of the silver bow! whose care
Chrysa surrounds, and Cilia’s lovely vale;
Whose sov’reign sway o’er Tenedos extends;
O Smintheus, hear! if e’er my offered gifts
Found favour in thy sight; if e’er to thee
I burn’d the fat of bulls and choicest goats,
Grant me this boon—upon the Grecian host
Let thine unerring darts avenge my tears.”

Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard:
Along Olympus’ heights he pass’d, his heart
Burning with wrath; behind his shoulders hung
His bow, and ample quiver; at his back
Rattled the fateful arrows as he mov’d;
Like the night-cloud he pass’d, and from afar
He bent against the ships, and sped the bolt;
And fierce and deadly twang’d the silver bow.
First on the mules and dogs, on man the last,
Was pour’d the arrowy storm; and through the camp,
Constant and num’rous, blaz’d the fun’ral fires.

Nine days the heav’nly Archer on the troops
Hurl’d his dread shafts; the tenth, th’ assembled Greeks
Achilles call’d to council; so inspir’d
By Juno, white-arm’d Goddess, who beheld
With pitying eyes the wasting hosts of Greece.
When all were met, and closely throng’d around,
Rose the swift-footed chief, and thus began:

“Great son of Atreus, to my mind there seems,
If we would ’scape from death, one only course,
Home to retrace our steps: since here at once
By war and pestilence our forces waste.
But seek we first some prophet, or some priest,
Or some wise vision-seer (since visions too
From Jove proceed), who may the cause explain,
Which with such deadly wrath Apollo fires:
If for neglected hecatombs or pray’rs
He blame us; or if fat of lambs and goats
May soothe his anger and the plague assuage.”

This said, he sat; and Thestor’s son arose,
Calchas, the chief of seers, to whom were known
The present, and the future, and the past;
Who, by his mystic art, Apollo’s gift,
Guided to Ilium’s shore the Grecian fleet.
Who thus with cautious speech replied, and said;
“Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n, thou bidd’st me say
Why thus incens’d the far-destroying King;
Therefore I speak; but promise thou, and swear,
By word and hand, to bear me harmless through.
For well I know my speech must one offend,
The Argive chief, o’er all the Greeks supreme;
And terrible to men of low estate
The anger of a King; for though awhile
He veil his wrath, yet in his bosom pent
It still is nurs’d, until the time arrive;
Say, then, wilt thou protect me, if I speak?”

Him answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Speak boldly out whate’er thine art can tell;
For by Apollo’s self I swear, whom thou,
O Calchas, serv’st, and who thy words inspires,
That, while I live, and see the light of Heav’n,
Not one of all the Greeks shall dare on thee,
Beside our ships, injurious hands to lay:
No, not if Agamemnon’s self were he,
Who ’mid our warriors boasts the foremost place.”

Embolden’d thus, th’ unerring prophet spoke:
“Not for neglected hecatombs or pray’rs,
But for his priest, whom Agamemnon scorn’d,
Nor took his ransom, nor his child restor’d;
On his account the Far-destroyer sends
This scourge of pestilence, and yet will send;
Nor shall we cease his heavy hand to feel,
Till to her sire we give the bright-ey’d girl,
Unbought, unransom’d, and to Chrysa’s shore
A solemn hecatomb despatch; this done,
The God, appeas’d, his anger may remit.”

This said, he sat; and Atreus’ godlike son,
The mighty monarch, Agamemnon, rose,
His dark soul fill’d with fury, and his eyes
Flashing like flames of fire; on Calchas first
A with’ring glance he cast, and thus he spoke;

“Prophet of ill! thou never speak’st to me
But words of evil omen; for thy soul
Delights to augur ill, but aught of good
Thou never yet hast promis’d, nor perform’d.
And now among the Greeks thou spread’st abroad
Thy lying prophecies, that all these ills
Come from the Far-destroyer, for that I
Refus’d the ransom of my lovely prize,
And that I rather chose herself to keep,
To me not less than Clytemnestra dear,
My virgin-wedded wife; nor less adorn’d
In gifts of form, of feature, or of mind.
Yet, if it must he so, I give her back;
I wish my people’s safety, not their death.
But seek me out forthwith some other spoil,
Lest empty-handed I alone appear
Of all the Greeks; for this would ill beseem;
And how I lose my present share, ye see.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Haughtiest of men, and greediest of the prey!
How shall our valiant Greeks for thee seek out
Some other spoil? no common fund have we
Of hoarded treasures; what our arms have won
From captur’d towns, has been already shar’d,
Nor can we now resume th’ apportion’d spoil.
Restore the maid, obedient to the God!
And if Heav’n will that we the strong-built walls
Of Troy should raze, our warriors will to thee
A threefold, fourfold recompense assign.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Think not, Achilles, valiant though thou art
In fight, and godlike, to defraud me thus;
Thou shalt not so persuade me, nor o’erreach.
Think’st thou to keep thy portion of the spoil,
While I with empty hands sit humbly down?
The bright-ey’d girl thou bidd’st me to restore;
If then the valiant Greeks for me seek out
Some other spoil, some compensation just,
’Tis well: if not, I with my own right hand
Will from some other chief, from thee perchance,
Or Ajax, or Ulysses, wrest his prey;
And woe to him, on whomsoe’er I call!
But this for future counsel we remit:
Haste we then now our dark-ribb’d bark to launch,
Muster a fitting crew, and place on board
The sacred hecatomb; then last embark
The fair Chryseis; and in chief command
Let some one of our councillors be plac’d,
Ajax, Ulysses, or Idomeneus,
Or thou, the most ambitious of them all,
That so our rites may soothe the angry God.”

To whom Achilles thus with scornful glance;
“Oh, cloth’d in shamelessness! oh, sordid soul!
How canst thou hope that any Greek for thee
Will brave the toils of travel or of war?
Well dost thou know that ’t was no feud of mine
With Troy’s brave sons that brought me here in arms;
They never did me wrong; they never drove
My cattle, or my horses; never sought
In Phthia’s fertile, life-sustaining fields
To waste the crops; for wide between us lay
The shadowy mountains and the roaring sea.
With thee, O void of shame! with thee we sail’d,
For Menelaus and for thee, ingrate,
Glory and fame on Trojan crests to win.
All this hast thou forgotten, or despis’d;
And threat’nest now to wrest from me the prize
I labour’d hard to win, and Greeks bestow’d.
Nor does my portion ever equal thine,
When on some populous town our troops have made
Successful war; in the contentious fight
The larger portion of the toil is mine;
But when the day of distribution comes,
Thine is the richest spoil; while I, forsooth,
Must be too well content to bear on board
Some paltry prize for all my warlike toil.
To Phthia now I go; so better far,
To steer my homeward course, and leave thee here
But little like, I deem, dishonouring me,
To fill thy coffers with the spoils of war.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Fly then, if such thy mind! I ask thee not
On mine account to stay; others there are
Will guard my honour and avenge my cause:
And chief of all, the Lord of counsel, Jove!
Of all the Heav’n-born Kings, thou art the man
I hate the most; for thou delight’st in nought
But war and strife: thy prowess I allow;
Yet this, remember, is the gift of Heav’n.
Return then, with thy vessels, if thou wilt,
And with thy followers, home; and lord it there
Over thy Myrmidons! I heed thee not!
I care not for thy fury! Hear my threat:
Since Phoebus wrests Chryseis from my arms,
In mine own ship, and with mine own good crew,
Her I send forth; and, in her stead, I mean,
Ev’n from thy tent, myself, to bear thy prize,
The fair Briseis; that henceforth thou know
How far I am thy master; and that, taught
By thine example, others too may fear
To rival me, and brave me to my face.”

Thus while he spake, Achilles chaf’d with rage;
And in his manly breast his heart was torn
With thoughts conflicting—whether from his side
To draw his mighty sword, and thrusting by
Th’ assembled throng, to kill th’ insulting King;
Or school his soul, and keep his anger down.
But while in mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
And half unsheath’d his sword, from Heav’n came down
Minerva, sent by Juno, white-arm’d Queen,
Whose love and care both chiefs alike enjoy’d.
She stood behind, and by the yellow hair
She held the son of Peleus, visible
To him alone, by all the rest unseen.
Achilles, wond’ring, turn’d, and straight he knew
The blue-eyed Pallas; awful was her glance;
Whom thus the chief with winged words address’d:

“Why com’st thou, child of aegis-bearing Jove?
To see the arrogance of Atreus’ son?
But this I say, and will make good my words,
This insolence may cost him soon his life.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“From Heav’n I came, to curb, if thou wilt hear,
Thy fury; sent by Juno, white-arm’d Queen,
Whose love and care ye both alike enjoy.
Cease, then, these broils, and draw not thus thy sword;
In words, indeed, assail him as thou wilt.
But this I promise, and will make it good,
The time shall come, when for this insolence
A threefold compensation shall be thine;
Only be sway’d by me, and curb thy wrath.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Goddess, I needs must yield to your commands,
Indignant though I be—for so ’tis best;
Who hears the Gods, of them his pray’rs are heard.”

He said: and on the silver hilt he stay’d
His pow’rful hand, and flung his mighty sword
Back to its scabbard, to Minerva’s word
Obedient: she her heav’nward course pursued
To join th’ Immortals in th’ abode of Jove.
But Peleus’ son, with undiminish’d wrath,
Atrides thus with bitter words address’d:

“Thou sot, with eye of dog, and heart of deer!
Who never dar’st to lead in armed fight
Th’ assembled host, nor with a chosen few
To man the secret ambush—for thou fear’st
To look on death—no doubt ’tis easier far,
Girt with thy troops, to plunder of his right
Whoe’er may venture to oppose thy will!
A tyrant King, because thou rul’st o’er slaves!
Were it not so, this insult were thy last.
But this I say, and with an oath confirm,
By this my royal staff, which never more
Shall put forth leaf nor spray, since first it left
Upon the mountain-side its parent stem,
Nor blossom more; since all around the axe
Hath lopp’d both leaf and bark, and now ’tis borne
Emblem of justice, by the sons of Greece,
Who guard the sacred ministry of law
Before the face of Jove! a mighty oath!
The time shall come, when all the sons of Greece
Shall mourn Achilles’ loss; and thou the while,
Heart-rent, shalt be all-impotent to aid,
When by the warrior-slayer Hector’s hand
Many shall fall; and then thy soul shall mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

Thus spoke Pelides; and upon the ground
He cast his staff, with golden studs emboss’d,
And took his seat; on th’ other side, in wrath,
Atrides burn’d; but Nestor interpos’d;
Nestor, the leader of the Pylian host,
The smooth-tongued chief, from whose persuasive lips
Sweeter than honey flowed the stream of speech.
Two generations of the sons of men
For him were past and gone, who with himself
Were born and bred on Pylos’ lovely shore,
And o’er the third he now held royal sway.
He thus with prudent words the chiefs address’d:

“Alas, alas! what grief is this for Greece!
What joy for Priam, and for Priam’s sons!
What exultation for the men of Troy,
To hear of feuds ’tween you, of all the Greeks
The first in council, and the first in fight!
Yet, hear my words, I pray; in years, at least,
Ye both must yield to me; and in times past
I liv’d with men, and they despis’d me not,
Abler in counsel, greater than yourselves.
Such men I never saw, and ne’er shall see,
As Pirithous and Dryas, wise and brave,
Coeneus, Exadius, godlike Polypheme,
And Theseus, Ægeus’ more than mortal son.
The mightiest they among the sons of men;
The mightiest they, and of the forest beasts
Strove with the mightiest, and their rage subdued.
With them from distant lands, from Pylos’ shore
I join’d my forces, and their call obey’d;
With them I play’d my part; with them, not one
Would dare to fight of mortals now on earth.
Yet they my counsels heard, my voice obey’d;
And hear ye also, for my words are wise.
Nor thou, though great thou be, attempt to rob
Achilles of his prize, but let him keep
The spoil assign’d him by the sons of Greece;
Nor thou, Pelides, with the monarch strive
In rivalry; for ne’er to sceptred King
Hath Jove such pow’rs, as to Atrides, giv’n;
And valiant though thou art, and Goddess-born,
Yet mightier he, for wider is his sway.
Atrides, curb thy wrath! while I beseech
Achilles to forbear; in whom the Greeks
From adverse war their great defender see.”

To whom the monarch, Agamemnon, thus:
“O father, full of wisdom are thy words;
But this proud chief o’er all would domineer;
O’er all he seeks to rule, o’er all to reign,
To all to dictate; which I will not bear.
Grant that the Gods have giv’n him warlike might,
Gave they unbridled license to his tongue?”

To whom Achilles, interrupting, thus:
“Coward and slave indeed I might be deem’d.
Could I submit to make thy word my law;
To others thy commands; seek not to me
To dictate, for I follow thee no more.
But hear me speak, and ponder what I say:
For the fair girl I fight not (since you choose
To take away the prize yourselves bestow’d)
With thee or any one; but of the rest
My dark swift ship contains, against my will
On nought shalt thou, unpunish’d, lay thy hand.
Make trial if thou wilt, that these may know;
Thy life-blood soon should reek upon my spear.”

After this conflict keen of angry speech,
The chiefs arose, the assembly was dispers’d.

With his own followers, and Menoetius’ son,
Achilles to his tents and ships withdrew.
But Atreus’ son launch’d a swift-sailing bark,
With twenty rowers mann’d, and plac’d on board
The sacred hecatomb; then last embark’d
The fair Chryseis, and in chief command
Laertes’ son, the sage Ulysses, plac’d.
They swiftly sped along the wat’ry way.

Next, proclamation through the camp was made
To purify the host; and in the sea,
Obedient to the word, they purified;
Then to Apollo solemn rites perform’d
With faultless hecatombs of bulls and goats,
Upon the margin of the wat’ry waste;
And, wreath’d in smoke, the savour rose to Heav’n.

The camp thus occupied, the King pursued
His threaten’d plan of vengeance; to his side
Calling Talthybius and Eurybates,
Heralds, and faithful followers, thus he spoke:

“Haste to Achilles’ tent, and in your hand
Back with you thence the fair Briseis bring:
If he refuse to send her, I myself
With a sufficient force will bear her thence,
Which he may find, perchance, the worse for him.”

So spake the monarch, and with stern command
Dismiss’d them; with reluctant steps they pass’d
Along the margin of the wat’ry waste,
Till to the tents and ships they came, where lay
The warlike Myrmidons. Their chief they found
Sitting beside his tent and dark-ribb’d ship.
Achilles mark’d their coming, not well pleas’d:
With troubled mien, and awe-struck by the King,
They stood, nor dar’d accost him; but himself
Divin’d their errand, and address’d them thus:

“Welcome, ye messengers of Gods and men,
Heralds! approach in safety; not with you,
But with Atrides, is my just offence,
Who for the fair Briseis sends you here.
Go, then, Patroclus, bring the maiden forth,
And give her to their hands; but witness ye,
Before the blessed Gods and mortal men,
And to the face of that injurious King,
When he shall need my arm, from shameful rout
To save his followers; blinded by his rage,
He neither heeds experience of the past
Nor scans the future, provident how best
To guard his fleet and army from the foe.”

He spoke: obedient to his friend and chief,
Patroclus led the fair Briseis forth,
And gave her to their hands; they to the ships
Retrac’d their steps, and with them the fair girl
Reluctant went: meanwhile Achilles, plung’d
In bitter grief, from all the band apart,
Upon the margin of the hoary sea
Sat idly gazing on the dark-blue waves;
And to his Goddess-mother long he pray’d,
With outstretch’d hands, “Oh, mother! since thy son
To early death by destiny is doom’d,
I might have hop’d the Thunderer on high,
Olympian Jove, with honour would have crown’d
My little space; but now disgrace is mine;
Since Agamemnon, the wide-ruling King,
Hath wrested from me, and still holds, my prize.”

Weeping, he spoke; his Goddess-mother heard,
Beside her aged father where she sat
In the deep ocean-caves: ascending quick
Through the dark waves, like to a misty cloud,
Beside her son she stood; and as he wept,
She gently touch’d him with her hand, and said,
“Why weeps my son? and whence his cause of grief?
Speak out, that I may hear, and share thy pain.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied,
Groaning, “Thou know’st; what boots to tell thee all?
On Thebes we march’d, Eetion’s sacred town,
And storm’d the walls, and hither bore the spoil.
The spoils were fairly by the sons of Greece
Apportion’d out; and to Atrides’ share
The beauteous daughter of old Chryses fell.
Chryses, Apollo’s priest, to free his child,
Came to th’ encampment of the brass-clad Greeks,
With costly ransom charg’d; and in his hand
The sacred fillet of his God he bore,
And golden staff; to all he sued, but chief
To Atreus’ sons, twin captains of the host.
Then through the ranks assenting murmurs ran,
The priest to rev’rence, and the ransom take:
Not so Atrides; he, with haughty mien
And bitter words, the trembling sire dismiss’d.
The old man turn’d in sorrow; but his pray’r
Phoebus Apollo heard, who lov’d him well.
Against the Greeks he bent his fatal bow,
And fast the people fell; on ev’ry side
Throughout the camp the heav’nly arrows flew;
A skilful seer at length the cause reveal’d
Why thus incens’d the Archer-God; I then,
The first, gave counsel to appease his wrath.
Whereat Atrides, full of fury, rose,
And utter’d threats, which he hath now fulfill’d.
For Chryses’ daughter to her native land
In a swift-sailing ship the keen-ey’d Greeks
Have sent, with costly off’rings to the God:
But her, assign’d me by the sons of Greece,
Brises’ fair daughter, from my tent e’en now
The heralds bear away. Then, Goddess, thou,
If thou hast pow’r, protect thine injur’d son.
Fly to Olympus, to the feet of Jove,
And make thy pray’r to him, if on his heart
Thou hast in truth, by word or deed, a claim.
For I remember, in my father’s house,
I oft have heard thee boast, how thou, alone
Of all th’ Immortals, Saturn’s cloud-girt son
Didst shield from foul disgrace, when all the rest,
Juno, and Neptune, and Minerva join’d,
With chains to bind him; then, O Goddess, thou
Didst set him free, invoking to his aid
Him of the hundred arms, whom Briareus
Th’ immortal Gods, and men Ægeon call.
He, mightier than his father, took his seat
By Saturn’s side, in pride of conscious strength:
Fear seiz’d on all the Gods, nor did they dare
To bind their King: of this remind him now,
And clasp his knees, and supplicate his aid
For Troy’s brave warriors, that the routed Greeks
Back to their ships with slaughter may be driv’n;
That all may taste the folly of their King,
And Agamemnon’s haughty self may mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

Thus he; and Thetis, weeping, thus replied:
“Alas, my child, that e’er I gave thee birth!
Would that beside thy ships thou could’st remain
From grief exempt, and insult! since by fate
Few years are thine, and not a lengthened term;
At once to early death and sorrows doom’d
Beyond the lot of man! in evil hour
I gave thee birth! But to the snow-clad heights
Of great Olympus, to the throne of Jove,
Who wields the thunder, thy complaints I bear.
Thou by thy ships, meanwhile, against the Greeks
Thine anger nurse, and from the fight abstain.
For Jove is to a solemn banquet gone
Beyond the sea, on Æthiopia’s shore,
Since yesternight; and with him all the Gods.
On the twelfth day he purpos’d to return
To high Olympus; thither then will I,
And to his feet my supplication make;
And he, I think, will not deny my suit.”

This said, she disappear’d; and left him there
Musing in anger on the lovely form
Tom from his arms by violence away.

Meantime, Ulysses, with his sacred freight,
Arriv’d at Chrysa’s strand; and when his bark
Had reach’d the shelter of the deep sea bay,
Their sails they furl’d, and lower’d to the hold;
Slack’d the retaining shrouds, and quickly struck
And stow’d away the mast; then with their sweeps
Pull’d for the beach, and cast their anchors out,
And made her fast with cables to the shore.
Then on the shingly breakwater themselves
They landed, and the sacred hecatomb
To great Apollo; and Chryseis last.
Her to the altar straight Ulysses led,
The wise in counsel; in her father’s hand
He plac’d the maiden, and address’d him thus:
“Chryses, from Agamemnon, King of men,
To thee I come, thy daughter to restore;
And to thy God, upon the Greeks’ behalf,
To offer sacrifice, if haply so
We may appease his wrath, who now incens’d
With grievous suff’ring visits all our host.”
Then to her sire he gave her; he with joy
Receiv’d his child; the sacred hecatomb
Around the well-built altar for the God
In order due they plac’d; their hands then washed,
And the salt cake prepar’d, before them all
With hands uplifted Chryses pray’d aloud:

“Hear me, God of the silver bow! whose care
Chrysa surrounds, and Cilla’s lovely vale,
Whose sov’reign sway o’er Tenedos extends!
Once hast thou heard my pray’r, aveng’d my cause,
And pour’d thy fury on the Grecian host.
Hear yet again, and grant what now I ask;
Withdraw thy chast’ning hand, and stay the plague.”

Thus, as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard.
Their pray’rs concluded, and the salt cake strew’d
Upon the victims’ heads, they drew them back,
And slew, and flay’d; then cutting from the thighs
The choicest pieces, and in double layers
O’erspreading them with fat, above them plac’d
The due meat-off’rings; then the aged priest
The cleft wood kindled, and libations pour’d
Of ruddy wine; arm’d with the five-fork’d prongs
Th’ attendant ministers beside him stood.
The thighs consum’d with fire, the inward parts
They tasted first; the rest upon the spits
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shared the social meal, nor lacked there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Th’ attendant youths the flowing goblets crown’d,
And in fit order serv’d the cups to all.
All day they sought the favour of the God,
The glorious paeans chanting, and the praise
Of Phoebus: he, well pleas’d, the strain receiv’d
But when the sun was set, and shades of night
O’erspread the sky, upon the sandy beach
Close to their ship they laid them down to rest.
And when the rosy-finger’d morn appear’d,
Back to the camp they took their homeward way
A fav’ring breeze the Far-destroyer sent:
They stepp’d the mast, and spread the snowy sail:
Full in the midst the bellying sail receiv’d
The gallant breeze; and round the vessel’s prow
The dark waves loudly roar’d, as on she rush’d
Skimming the seas, and cut her wat’ry way.
Arriv’d where lay the wide-spread host of Greece,
Their dark-ribb’d vessel on the beach they drew
High on the sand, and strongly shor’d her up;
Then through the camp they took their sev’ral ways.

Meantime, beside the ships Achilles sat,
The Heav’n-born son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Chafing with rage repress’d; no more he sought
The honour’d council, nor the battle-field;
But wore his soul away, and inly pin’d
For the fierce joy and tumult of the fight.
But when the twelfth revolving day was come,
Back to Olympus’ heights th’ immortal Gods,
Jove at their head, together all return’d.
Then Thetis, mindful of her son’s request,
Rose from the ocean wave, and sped in haste
To high Olympus, and the courts of Heav’n.
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there she found
Sitting apart upon the topmost crest
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; at his feet
She sat, and while her left hand clasp’d his knees,
Her right approached his beard, and suppliant thus
She made her pray’r to Saturn’s royal son:

“Father, if e’er amid th’ immortal Gods
By word or deed I did thee service true,
Hear now my pray’r! Avenge my hapless son,
Of mortals shortest-liv’d, insulted now
By mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
And plunder’d of his lawful spoils of war.
But Jove, Olympian, Lord of counsel, Thou
Avenge his cause; and give to Trojan arms
Such strength and pow’r, that Greeks may learn how much
They need my son, and give him honour due.”

She said: the Cloud-compeller answer’d not,
But silent sat; then Thetis clasp’d his knees,
And hung about him, and her suit renew’d:

“Give me thy promise sure, thy gracious nod,
Or else refuse (for thou hast none to fear),
That I may learn, of all th’ immortal Gods,
How far I stand the lowest in thine eyes.”

Then, much disturb’d, the Cloud-compeller spoke:
“Sad work thou mak’st, in bidding me oppose
My will to Juno’s, when her bitter words
Assail me; for full oft amid the Gods
She taunts me, that I aid the Trojan cause.
But thou return, that Juno see thee not,
And leave to me the furth’rance of thy suit.
Lo, to confirm thy faith, I nod my head;
And well among th’ immortal Gods is known
The solemn import of that pledge from me:
For ne’er my promise shall deceive, or fail,
Or be recall’d, if with a nod confirm’d.”

He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows;
Wav’d on th’ immortal head th’ ambrosial locks,
And all Olympus trembled at his nod.
They parted thus: from bright Olympus’ heights
The Goddess hasted to her ocean-caves,
Jove to his palace; at his entrance all
Rose from their seats at once; not one presum’d
To wait his coming, but advanc’d to meet.
Then on his throne he sat; but not unmark’d
Of Juno’s eye had been the council held
In secret with the silver-footed Queen,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God;
And with sharp words she thus addressed her Lord:

“Tell me, deceiver, who was she with whom
Thou late held’st council? ever ’tis thy way
Apart from me to weave thy secret schemes,
Nor dost thou freely share with me thy mind.”

To whom the Sire of Gods and men replied:
“Expect not, Juno, all my mind to know;
My wife thou art, yet would such knowledge be
Too much for thee; whate’er I deem it fit
That thou shouldst know, nor God nor man shall hear
Before thee; but what I in secret plan,
Seek not to know, nor curiously inquire.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Ne’er have I sought, or now, or heretofore,
Thy secret thoughts to know; what thou think’st fit
To tell, I wait thy gracious will to hear.
Yet fear I in my soul thou art beguil’d
By wiles of Thetis, silver-footed Queen,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God;
For she was with thee early, and embrac’d
Thy knees, and has, I think, thy promise sure,
Thou wilt avenge Achilles’ cause, and bring
Destructive slaughter on the Grecian host.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Presumptuous, to thy busy thoughts thou giv’st
Too free a range, and watchest all I do;
Yet shalt thou not prevail, but rather thus
Be alien’d from my heart—the worse for thee!
If this be so, it is my sov’reign will.
But now, keep silence, and my words obey,
Lest all th’ Immortals fail, if I be wroth,
To rescue thee from my resistless hand.”

He said, and terror seiz’d the stag-ey’d Queen:
Silent she sat, curbing her spirit down,
And all the Gods in pitying sorrow mourn’d.
Vulcan, the skill’d artificer, then first
Broke silence, and with soothing words address’d
His mother, Juno, white-arm’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Sad were’t, indeed, and grievous to be borne,
If for the sake of mortal men you two
Should suffer angry passions to arise,
And kindle broils in Heav’n; so should our feast
By evil influence all its sweetness lack.
Let me advise my mother (and I know
That her own reason will my words approve)
To speak my father fair; lest he again
Reply in anger, and our banquet mar.
For Jove, the lightning’s Lord, if such his will,
Might hurl us from our seats (so great his pow’r),
But thou address him still with gentle words;
So shall his favour soon again be ours.”

This said, he rose, and in his mother’s hand
A double goblet plac’d, as thus he spoke:
“Have patience, mother mine! though much enforc’d,
Restrain thy spirit, lest perchance these eyes,
Dear as thou art, behold thee brought to shame;
And I, though griev’d in heart, be impotent
To save thee; for ’tis hard to strive with Jove.
When to thy succour once before I came,
He seiz’d me by the foot, and hurl’d me down
From Heav’n’s high threshold; all the day I fell,
And with the setting sun, on Lemnos’ isle
Lighted, scarce half alive; there was I found,
And by the Sintian people kindly nurs’d.”

Thus as he spoke, the white-armed Goddess smil’d,
And, smiling, from, his hand receiv’d the cup,
Then to th’ Immortals all, in order due,
He minister’d, and from the flagon pour’d
The luscious nectar; while among the Gods
Rose laughter irrepressible, at sight
Of Vulcan hobbling round the spacious hall.

Thus they till sunset pass’d the festive hours;
Nor lack’d the banquet aught to please the sense,
Nor sound of tuneful lyre, by Phoebus touch’d,
Nor Muses’ voice, who in alternate strains
Responsive sang: but when the sun had set,
Each to his home departed, where for each
The crippled Vulcan, matchless architect,
With wondrous skill a noble house had rear’d.

To his own couch, where he was wont of old,
When overcome by gentle sleep, to rest,
Olympian Jove ascended; there he slept,
And, by his side, the golden-throned Queen.



ARGUMENT.

THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.


Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful
vision to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle in order
to make the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The general, who
is deluded with the hopes of taking Troy without his assistance, but
fears the army was discouraged by his absence and the late plague, as
well as by length of time, contrives to make trial of their disposition
by a stratagem. He first communicates his design to the princes in
council that he would propose a return to the soldiers, and that they
should put a stop to them if the proposal was embraced. Then he
assembles the whole host, and upon moving for a return to Greece, they
unanimously agree to it, and run to prepare the ships. They are
detained by the management of Ulysses, who chastises the insolence of
Thersites. The assembly is recalled, several speeches made on the
occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed, which was to
make a general muster of the troops, and to divide them into their
several nations, before they proceeded to battle. This gives occasion
to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the Greeks and Trojans, in a
large catalogue.

The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The
scene lies in the Grecian camp and upon the sea-shore; toward the end
it removes to Troy.

BOOK II.

All night in sleep repos’d the other Gods,
And helmed warriors; but the eyes of Jove
Sweet slumber held not, pondering in his mind
How to avenge Achilles’ cause, and pour
Destructive slaughter on the Grecian host.
Thus as he mus’d, the wisest course appear’d
By a deluding vision to mislead
The son of Atreus; and with winged words
Thus to a phantom form he gave command:
“Hie thee, deluding Vision, to the camp
And ships of Greece, to Agamemnon’s tent;
There, changing nought, as I command thee, speak.
Bid that he arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat; for the wide-built streets of Troy
He now may capture; since th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer; all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs; and woes impend o’er Troy.”

He said: the Vision heard, and straight obey’d:
Swiftly he sped, and reached the Grecian ships,
And sought the son of Atreus; him he found
Within his tent, wrapped in ambrosial sleep;
Above his head he stood, like Neleus’ son,
Nestor, whom Agamemnon rev’renc’d most
Of all the Elders; in his likeness cloth’d
Thus spoke the heav’nly Vision; “Sleep’st thou, son
Of Atreus, valiant warrior, horseman bold?
To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief,
Charg’d with the public weal, and cares of state.
Hear now the words I bear; to thee I come
A messenger from Jove, who from on high
Looks down on thee with eyes of pitying love.
He bids thee arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat; since the wide-built streets of Troy
Thou now mayst capture; for th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer; all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs; and woes impend o’er Troy.
Bear this in mind; and when from sleep arous’d
Let not my words from thy remembrance fade.”
This said, he vanish’d; and the monarch left,
Inspir’d with thoughts which ne’er should come to pass.
For in that day he vainly hop’d to take
The town of Priam; ignorant what Jove
Design’d in secret, or what woes, what groans,
What lengthen’d labours in the stubborn fight,
Were yet for Trojans and for Greeks in store.
He woke from sleep; but o’er his senses spread
Dwelt still the heavenly voice; he sat upright;
He donn’d his vest of texture fine, new-wrought,
Then o’er it threw his ample robe, and bound
His sandals fair around his well-turn’d feet;
And o’er his shoulders flung his sword, adorn’d
With silver studs; and bearing in his hand
His royal staff, ancestral, to the ships
Where lay the brass-clad warriors, bent his way.

Aurora now was rising up the steep
Of great Olympus, to th’ immortal Gods
Pure light diffusing; when Atrides bade
The clear-voic’d heralds to th’ Assembly call
The gen’ral host; they gave the word, and straight
From ev’ry quarter throng’d the eager crowd.
But first, of all the Elders, by the side
Of Nestor’s ship, the aged Pylian chief,
A secret conclave Agamemnon call’d;
And, prudent, thus the chosen few address’d:
“Hear me, my friends! In the still hours of night
I saw a heav’nly Vision in my sleep:
Most like it seemed in stature, form, and face
To rev’rend Nestor; at my head it stood,
And with these words address’d me—‘Sleep’st thou, son
Of Atreus, valiant warrior, horseman bold?
To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief,
Charg’d with the public weal, and cares of state.
Hear now the words I bear: to thee I come
A messenger from Jove, who from on high
Looks down on thee with eyes of pitying love.
He bids thee arm in haste the long-hair’d Greeks
To combat: since the wide-built streets of Troy
Thou now may’st capture; for th’ immortal Gods
Watch over her no longer: all are gain’d
By Juno’s pray’rs, and woes impend o’er Troy.
Bear thou my words in mind.’ Thus as he spoke
He vanish’d; and sweet sleep forsook mine eyes.
Seek we then straight to arm the sons of Greece:
But first, as is our wont, myself will prove
The spirit of the army; and suggest
Their homeward voyage; ye, throughout the camp
Restore their courage, and restrain from flight.”

Thus having said, he sat; and next arose
Nestor, the chief of Pylos’ sandy shore.
Who thus with prudent speech replied, and said:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
If any other had this Vision seen,
We should have deem’d it false, and laugh’d to scorn
The idle tale; but now it hath appear’d,
Of all our army, to the foremost man:
Seek we then straight to arm the sons of Greece.”

He said, and from the council led the way.
Uprose the sceptred monarchs, and obey’d
Their leader’s call, and round them throng’d the crowd.
As swarms of bees, that pour in ceaseless stream
From out the crevice of some hollow rock,
Now clust’ring, and anon ’mid vernal flow’rs,
Some here, some there, in busy numbers fly;
So to th’ Assembly from their tents and ships
The countless tribes came thronging; in their midst,
By Jove enkindled, Rumour urged them on.
Great was the din; and as the mighty mass
Sat down, the solid earth beneath them groan’d;
Nine heralds rais’d their voices loud, to quell
The storm of tongues, and bade the noisy crowd
Be still, and listen to the Heav’n-born Kings.

At length they all were seated, and awhile
Their clamours sank to silence; then uprose
The monarch Agamemnon, in his hand
His royal staff, the work of Vulcan’s art;
Which Vulcan to the son of Saturn gave;
To Hermes he, the heav’nly messenger;
Hermes to Pelops, matchless charioteer;
Pelops to Atreus; Atreus at his death
Bequeath’d it to Thyestes, wealthy Lord
Of num’rous herds; to Agamemnon last
Thyestes left it; token of his sway
O’er all the Argive coast, and neighbouring isles.
On this the monarch leant, as thus he spoke:
“Friends, Grecian Heroes, Ministers of Mars!
Grievous, and all unlook’d for, is the blow
Which Jove hath dealt me; by his promise led
I hop’d to raze the strong-built walls of Troy,
And home return in safety; but it seems
He falsifies his word, and bids me now
Return to Argos, frustrate of my hope,
Dishonour’d, and with grievous loss of men.
Such now appears th’ o’er-ruling sov’reign will
Of Saturn’s son; who oft hath sunk the heads
Of many a lofty city in the dust,
And yet will sink; for mighty is his hand.
’Tis shame indeed that future days should hear
How such a force as ours, so great, so brave,
Hath thus been baffled, fighting, as we do,
’Gainst numbers far inferior to our own,
And see no end of all our warlike toil.
For should we choose, on terms of plighted truce,
Trojans and Greeks, to number our array;
Of Trojans, all that dwell within the town,
And we, by tens disposed, to every ten,
To crown our cups, one Trojan should assign,
Full many a ten no cupbearer would find:
So far the sons of Greece outnumber all
That dwell within the town; but to their aid
Bold warriors come from all the cities round,
Who greatly harass me, and render vain
My hope to storm the strong-built walls of Troy.
Already now nine weary years have pass’d;
The timbers of our ships are all decay’d,
The cordage rotted; in our homes the while
Our wives and helpless children sit, in vain
Expecting our return; and still the work,
For which we hither came, remains undone.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
Home to direct our course, since here in vain
We strive to take the well-built walls of Troy.”

Thus as he spoke, the crowd, that had not heard
The secret council, by his words was mov’d;
So sway’d and heav’d the multitude, as when
O’er the vast billows of th’ Icarian sea
Eurus and Notus from the clouds of Heav’n
Pour forth their fury; or as some deep field
Of wavy corn, when sweeping o’er the plain
The ruffling west wind sways the bending ears;
So was th’ Assembly stirr’d; and tow’rd the ships
With clam’rous joy they rush’d; beneath, their feet
Rose clouds of dust, while one to other call’d
To seize the ships and drag them to the main.
They clear’d the channels, and with shouts of “home”
That rose to Heav’n, they knock’d the shores away.
Then had the Greeks in shameful flight withdrawn,
Had Juno not to Pallas thus appeal’d:
“Oh Heav’n! brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Shall thus the Greeks, in ignominious flight,
O’er the wide sea their homeward course pursue,
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave, on whose account,
Far from their home, so many valiant Greeks
Have cast their lives away? Go quickly thou
Amid the brass-clad Greeks, and man by man
Address with words persuasive, nor permit
To launch their well-trimm’d vessels on the deep.”

She said, nor did Minerva not obey,
But swift descending from Olympus’ heights
With rapid flight she reach’d the Grecian ships.
Laertes’ son, in council sage as Jove
There found she standing; he no hand had laid
On his dark vessel, for with bitter grief
His heart was filled; the blue-ey’d Maid approach’d,
And thus address’d him: “Great Laertes’ son,
Ulysses, sage in council, can it be
That you, the men of Greece, embarking thus
On your swift ships, in ignominious flight,
O’er the wide sea will take your homeward way,
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave, on whose account
Far from their homes so many valiant Greeks
Have cast their lives away? Go quickly thou
Among the multitude, and man by man
Address with words persuasive, nor permit
To launch their well-trimm’d vessels on the deep.”

She said; the heav’nly voice Ulysses knew;
Straight, springing to the course, he cast aside,
And to Eurybates of Ithaca,
His herald and attendant, threw his robe;
Then to Atrides hasten’d, and by him
Arm’d with his royal staff ancestral, pass’d
With rapid step amid the ships of Greece.
Each King or leader whom he found he thus
With cheering words encourag’d and restrain’d:
“O gallant friend, ’tis not for thee to yield,
Like meaner men, to panic; but thyself
Sit quiet, and the common herd restrain.
Thou know’st not yet Atrides’ secret mind:
He tries us now, and may reprove us soon.
His words in council reach’d not all our ears:
See that he work us not some ill; for fierce
His anger; and the Lord of counsel, Jove,
From whom proceeds all honour, loves him well.”

But of the common herd whome’er he found
Clam’ring, he check’d with staff and threat’ning words:
“Good friend, keep still, and hear what others say,
Thy betters far: for thou art good for nought,
Of small account in council or in fight.
All are not sovereigns here: ill fares the state
Where many masters rule; let one be Lord,
One King supreme; to whom wise Saturn’s son
In token of his sov’reign power hath giv’n
The sceptre’s sway and ministry of law.”

Such were his words, as through the ranks he pass’d:
They from the vessels and the tents again
Throng’d to th’ Assembly, with such rush of sound,
As when the many-dashing ocean’s wave
Breaks on the shore, and foams the frothing sea.
The others all were settled in their seats:
Only Thersites, with unmeasur’d words,
Of which he had good store, to rate the chiefs,
Not over-seemly, but wherewith he thought
To move the crowd to laughter, brawl’d aloud.
The ugliest man was he who came to Troy:
With squinting eyes, and one distorted foot,
His shoulders round, and buried in his breast
His narrow head, with scanty growth of hair.
Against Achilles and Ulysses most
His hate was turn’d; on them his venom pour’d;
Anon, at Agamemnon’s self he launch’d
His loud-tongued ribaldry; ’gainst him he knew
Incensed the public mind; and bawling loud,[1]
With scurril words, he thus address’d the King:
“What more, thou son of Atreus, would’st thou have?
Thy tents are full of brass; and in those tents
Many fair women, whom, from all the spoil,
We Greeks, whene’er some wealthy town we take,
Choose first of all, and set apart for thee.
Or dost thou thirst for gold, which here perchance
Some Trojan brings, the ransom of his son
Captur’d by me, or by some other Greek?
Or some new girl, to gratify thy lust,
Kept for thyself apart? a leader, thou
Shouldst not to evil lead the sons of Greece.
Ye slaves! ye coward souls! Women of Greece!
I will not call you men! why go we not
Home with our ships, and leave this mighty chief
To gloat upon his treasures, and find out
Whether in truth he need our aid, or no;
Who on Achilles, his superior far,
Foul scorn hath cast, and robb’d him of his prize,
Which for himself he keeps? Achilles, sure,
Is not intemperate, but mild of mood;
Else, Atreus’ son, this insult were thy last.”

On Agamemnon, leader of the host,
With words like these Thersites pour’d his hate;
But straight Ulysses at his side appear’d,
And spoke, with scornful glance, in stern rebuke:
“Thou babbling fool, Thersites, prompt of speech,
Restrain thy tongue, nor singly thus presume
The Kings to slander; thou, the meanest far
Of all that with the Atridae came to Troy.
Ill it beseems, that such an one as thou
Should lift thy voice against the Kings, and rail
With scurril ribaldry, and prate of home.
How these affairs may end, we know not yet;
Nor how, or well or ill, we may return.
Cease then against Atrides, King of men,
To pour thy spite, for that the valiant Greeks
To him, despite thy railing, as of right
An ample portion of the spoils assign.
But this I tell thee, and will make it good,
If e’er I find thee play the fool, as now,
Then may these shoulders cease this head to bear,
And may my son Telemachus no more
Own me his father, if I strip not off
Thy mantle and thy garments, aye, expose
Thy nakedness, and flog thee to the ships
Howling, and scourg’d with ignominious stripes.”

Thus as he spoke, upon Thersites’ neck
And back came down his heavy staff; the wretch
Shrank from the blow, and scalding tears let fall.
Where struck the golden-studded staff, appear’d
A bloody weal: Thersites quail’d, and down,
Quiv’ring with pain, he sat, and wip’d away.
With horrible grimace, the trickling tears.
The Greeks, despite their anger, laugh’d aloud,
And one to other said, “Good faith, of all
The many works Ulysses well hath done,
Wise in the council, foremost in the fight,
He ne’er hath done a better, than when now
He makes this scurril babbler hold his peace.
Methinks his headstrong spirit will not soon
Lead him again to vilify the Kings.”

Thus spoke the gen’ral voice: but, staff in hand,
Ulysses rose; Minerva by his side,
In likeness of a herald, bade the crowd
Keep silence, that the Greeks, from first to last,
Might hear his words, and ponder his advice.
He thus with prudent phrase his speech began:
“Great son of Atreus, on thy name, O King,
Throughout the world will foul reproach be cast,
If Greeks forget their promise, nor make good
The vow they took to thee, when hitherward
We sailed from Argos’ grassy plains, to raze,
Ere our return, the well-built walls of Troy.
But now, like helpless widows, or like babes,
They mourn their cruel fate, and pine for home.
’Tis hard indeed defeated to return;
The seaman murmurs, if from wife and home,
Ev’n for one month, his well-found bark be stay’d,
Toss’d by the wint’ry blasts and stormy sea;
But us the ninth revolving year beholds
Still ling’ring here: I cannot therefore blame
Our valiant Greeks, if by the ships I hear
Their murmurs; yet ’twere surely worst of all
Long to remain, and bootless to return.
Bear up, my friends, remain awhile, and see
If Calchas truly prophesy, or no.
For this ye all have seen, and can yourselves
Bear witness, all who yet are spar’d by fate,
Not long ago, when ships of Greece were met
At Aulis, charg’d with evil freight for Troy,
And we, around a fountain, to the Gods
Our altars rear’d, with faultless hecatombs,
Near a fair plane-tree, where bright water flow’d,
Behold a wonder! by Olympian Jove
Sent forth to light, a snake, with burnish’d scales,
Of aspect fearful, issuing from beneath
The altars, glided to the plane-tree straight.
There, on the topmost bough, beneath the leaves
Cow’ring, a sparrow’s callow nestlings lay;
Eight fledglings, and the parent bird the ninth.
All the eight nestlings, utt’ring piercing cries,
The snake devour’d; and as the mother flew,
Lamenting o’er her offspring, round and round,
Uncoiling, caught her, shrieking, by the wing.
Then, when the sparrow’s nestlings and herself
The snake had swallowed, by the God, who first
Sent him to light, a miracle was wrought:
For Jove, the deep-designing Saturn’s son,
Turn’d him to stone; we stood, and wond’ring gaz’d.
But when this prodigy befell our rites,
Calchas, inspir’d of Heaven, took up his speech:
‘Ye long-haired sons of Greece, why stand ye thus
In mute amaze? to us Olympian Jove,
To whom be endless praise, vouchsafes this sign,
Late sent, of late fulfilment: as ye saw
The snake devour the sparrow and her young,
Eight nestlings, and the parent bird the ninth:
So, for so many years, are we condemn’d
To wage a fruitless war; but in the tenth
The wide-built city shall at last be ours.’
Thus he foretold, and now the time is come.
Here then, ye well-greav’d Greeks, let all remain,
Till Priam’s wealthy city be our own.”

He said, and loudly cheer’d the Greeks—and loud
From all the hollow ships came back the cheers—
In admiration of Ulysses’ speech.
Gerenian Nestor next took up the word:
“Like children, Grecian warriors, ye debate;
Like babes to whom unknown are feats of arms.
Where then are now our solemn covenants,
Our plighted oaths? Go, cast we to the fire
Our councils held, our warriors’ plans matur’d,
Our absolute pledges, and our hand-plight giv’n,
In which our trust was placed; since thus in vain
In words we wrangle, and how long soe’er
We here remain, solution none we find.
Atrides, thou, as is thy wont, maintain
Unchang’d thy counsel; for the stubborn fight
Array the Greeks; and let perdition seize
Those few, those two or three among the host,
Who hold their separate counsel—(not on them
Depends the issue!)—rather than return
To Argos, ere we prove if Jove indeed
Will falsify his promis’d word, or no.
For well I ween, that on the day when first
We Grecians hitherward our course address’d,
To Troy the messengers of blood and death,
Th’ o’er-ruling son of Saturn, on our right
His lightning flashing, with auspicious sign
Assur’d us of his favour; let not then
The thoughts of home be breath’d, ere Trojan wives
Given to our warriors, retribution pay
For wrongs by us, in Helen’s cause, sustain’d.
But whoso longs, if such an one there be,
To make his homeward voyage, let him take
His well-rigg’d bark, and go; before the rest
To meet the doom of death! But thou, O King!
Be well advis’d thyself, and others lead
By wholesome counsel; for the words I speak
Are not to be despis’d; by tribes and clans,
O Agamemnon! range thy troops, that so
Tribe may to tribe give aid, and clan to clan.
If thus thou do, and Greeks thy words obey,
Then shalt thou see, of chiefs and troops alike,
The good and bad; for on their own behoof
They all shall fight; and if thou fail, shalt know
Whether thy failure be of Heav’n’s decree,
Or man’s default and ignorance of war.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Father, in council, of the sons of Greece,
None can compare with thee; and would to Jove
To Pallas, and Apollo, at my side
I had but ten such counsellors as thee!
Then soon should royal Priam’s city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.
But now on me hath aegis-bearing Jove,
The son of Saturn, fruitless toil impos’d,
And hurtful quarrels; for in wordy war
About a girl, Achilles and myself
Engag’d; and I, alas! the strife began:
Could we be friends again, delay were none,
How short soe’er, of Ilium’s final doom.
But now to breakfast, ere we wage the fight.
Each sharpen well his spear, his shield prepare,
Each to his fiery steeds their forage give,
Each look his chariot o’er, that through the day
We may unwearied stem the tide of war;
For respite none, how short soe’er, shall be
Till night shall bid the storm of battle cease.
With sweat shall reek upon each warrior’s breast
The leathern belt beneath the cov’ring shield;
And hands shall ache that wield the pond’rous spear:
With sweat shall reek the fiery steeds that draw
Each warrior’s car; but whomsoe’er I find
Loit’ring beside the beaked ships, for him
’Twere hard to’scape the vultures and the dogs.”

He said; and from th’ applauding ranks of Greece
Rose a loud sound, as when the ocean wave,
Driv’n by the south wind on some lofty beach,
Dashes against a prominent crag, expos’d
To blasts from every storm that roars around.
Uprising then, and through the camp dispers’d
They took their sev’ral ways, and by their tents
The fires they lighted, and the meal prepar’d;
And each to some one of the Immortal Gods
His off’ring made, that in the coming fight
He might escape the bitter doom of death.
But to the o’erruling son of Saturn, Jove,
A sturdy ox, well-fatten’d, five years old,
Atrides slew; and to the banquet call’d
The aged chiefs and councillors of Greece;
Nestor the first, the King Idomeneus,
The two Ajaces next, and Tydeus’ son,
Ulysses sixth, as Jove in council sage.
But uninvited Menelaus came,
Knowing what cares upon his brother press’d.
Around the ox they stood, and on his head
The salt cake sprinkled; then amid them all
The monarch Agamemnon pray’d aloud:
“Most great, most glorious Jove! who dwell’st on high,
In clouds and darkness veil’d, grant Thou that ere
This sun shall set, and night o’erspread the earth,
I may the haughty walls of Priam’s house
Lay prostrate in the dust; and burn with fire
His lofty gates; and strip from Hector’s breast
His sword-rent tunic, while around his corpse
Many brave comrades, prostrate, bite the dust.”

Thus he; but Saturn’s son his pray’r denied;
Receiv’d his off’rings, but his toils increas’d.
Their pray’rs concluded, and the salt cake strewed
Upon the victim’s head, they drew him back,
And slew, and flay’d; then cutting from the thighs
The choicest pieces, and in double layers
O’erspreading them with fat, above them plac’d
The due meat-off’rings; these they burnt with logs
Of leafless timber; and the inward parts,
First to be tasted, o’er the fire they held.
The thighs consum’d with fire, the inward parts
They tasted first; the rest upon the spits
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shared the social meal, nor lacked there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Gerenian Nestor thus his speech began:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Great Atreus’ son, no longer let us pause,
The work delaying which the pow’rs of Heav’n
Have trusted to our hands; do thou forthwith
Bid that the heralds proclamation make,
And summon through the camp the brass-clad Greeks;
While, in a body, through the wide-spread ranks
We pass, and stimulate their warlike zeal.”

He said; and Agamemnon, King of men,
Obedient to his counsel, gave command
That to the war the clear-voic’d heralds call
The long-hair’d Greeks: they gave the word, and straight
From ev’ry quarter throng’d the eager crowd.
The Heav’n-born Kings, encircling Atreus’ son,
The troops inspected: Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid,
Before the chiefs her glorious aegis bore,
By time untouch’d, immortal: all around
A hundred tassels hung, rare works of art,
All gold, each one a hundred oxen’s price.
With this the Goddess pass’d along the ranks,
Exciting all; and fix’d in every breast
The firm resolve to wage unwearied war;
And dearer to their hearts than thoughts of home
Or wish’d return, became the battle-field.

As when a wasting fire, on mountain tops,
Hath seized the blazing woods, afar is seen
The glaring light; so, as they mov’d, to Heav’n
Flash’d the bright glitter of their burnish’d arms.

As when a num’rous flock of birds, or geese,
Or cranes, or long-neck’d swans, on Asian mead,
Beside Cayster’s stream, now here, now there,
Disporting, ply their wings; then settle down
With clam’rous noise, that all the mead resounds;
So to Scamander’s plain, from tents and ships,
Pour’d forth the countless tribes; the firm earth groan’d
Beneath the tramp of steeds and armed men.
Upon Scamander’s flow’ry mead they stood,
Unnumber’d as the vernal leaves and flow’rs.

Or as the multitudinous swarms of flies,
That round the cattle-sheds in spring-tide pour,
While the warm milk is frothing in the pail:
So numberless upon the plain, array’d
For Troy’s destruction, stood the long-hair’d Greeks.
And as experienced goat-herds, when their flocks
Are mingled in the pasture, portion out
Their sev’ral charges, so the chiefs array’d
Their squadrons for the fight; while in the midst
The mighty monarch Agamemnon mov’d:
His eye, and lofty brow, the counterpart
Of Jove, the Lord of thunder; in his girth
Another Mars, with Neptune’s ample chest.
As ’mid the thronging heifers in a herd
Stands, proudly eminent, the lordly bull;
So, by Jove’s will, stood eminent that day,
’Mid many heroes, Atreus’ godlike son.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Muses (for ye are Goddesses, and ye
Were present, and know all things: we ourselves
But hear from Rumour’s voice, and nothing know),
Who were the chiefs and mighty Lords of Greece.
But should I seek the multitude to name,
Not if ten tongues were mine, ten mouths to speak,
Voice inexhaustible, and heart of brass,
Should I succeed, unless, Olympian maids,
The progeny of aegis-bearing Jove,
Ye should their names record, who came to Troy.
The chiefs, and all the ships, I now rehearse.

Bœotia’s troops by Peneleus were led,
And Leitus, and Prothoenor bold,
Arcesilas and Clonius: they who dwelt
In Hyria, and on Aulis’ rocky coast,
Scoenus, and Scolus, and the highland range
Of Eteonus; in Thespeia’s vale,
Graia, and Mycalessus’ wide-spread plains:
And who in Harma and Eilesium dwelt,
And in Erythrae, and in Eleon,
Hyle, and Peteon, and Ocalea,
In Copae, and in Medeon’s well-built fort,
Eutresis, Thisbe’s dove-frequented woods,
And Coronca, and the grassy meads
Of Haliartus; and Plataea’s plain,
In Glissa, and the foot of Lower Thebes,
And in Anchestus, Neptune’s sacred grove;
And who in viny-cluster’d Arne dwelt,
And in Mideia, and the lovely site
Of Nissa, and Anthedon’s utmost bounds.
With these came fifty vessels; and in each
Were six score youths, Bœotia’s noblest flow’r.

Who in Aspledon dwelt, and in Minyas’ realm
Orehomenus, two sons of Mars obey’d,
Ascalaphus, and bold Ialmenus;
In Actor’s house, the son of Azeus, born
Of fair Astyoche, a maiden pure,
Till in the upper chamber, where she slept,
Stout Mars by stealth her virgin bed assail’d:
Of these came thirty ships in order due.

By Schedius and Epistrophus, the sons
Of great Iphitus, son of Naubolus,
Were led the Phocian forces; these were they
Who dwelt in Cyparissus, and the rock
Of Python, and on Crissa’s lovely plain;
And who in Daulis, and in Panope,
Anemorea and IIyampolis,
And by Cephisus’ sacred waters dwelt,
Or in Lilaea, by Cephisus’ springs.
In their command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.
These were the leaders of the Phocian bands,
And on Bœotia’s left their camp was pitch’d.

Ajax, Oileus’ son, the Locrians led;
Swift-footed, less than Ajax Telamon,
Of stature low, with linen breastplate arm’d:
But skill’d to throw the spear o’er all who dwell
In Hellas or Achaia: these were they
From Cynos, Opus, and Calliarus,
Bessa, and Scarpha, and Augaea fair,
Tarpha, and Thronium, by Boagrius’ stream.
Him from beyond Euboea’s sacred isle,
Of Locrians follow’d forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Breathing firm courage high, th’ Abantian host,
Who from Euboea and from Chalcis came,
Or who in vine-clad Histiaea dwelt,
Eretria, and Cerinthus maritime,
And who the lofty fort of Dium held,
And in Carystus and in Styra dwelt:
These Elephenor led, true plant of Mars,
Chalcodon’s son, the brave Abantian chief.
Him, all conspicuous with their long black hair,
The bold Abantians follow’d: spearmen skill’d,
Who through the foemen’s breastplates knew full well,
Held in firm grasp, to drive the ashen spear.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who in Athens’ well-built city dwelt,
The noble-soul’d Erectheus’ heritage;
Child of the fertile soil, by Pallas rear’d,
Daughter of Jove, who him in Athens plac’d
In her own wealthy temple; there with blood
Of bulls and lambs, at each revolving year,
The youths of Athens do him sacrifice;
These by Menestheus, Peteus’ son, were led.
With him might none of mortal men compare,
In order due of battle to array
Chariots and buckler’d men; Nestor alone
Perchance might rival him, his elder far.
In his command came fifty dark-ribb’d ships.

Twelve ships from Salamis with Ajax came,
And they beside th’ Athenian troops were rang’d.

Those who from Argos, and the well-wall’d town
Of Tyrins came, and from Hermione,
And Asine, deep-bosom’d in the bay;
And from Troezene and Eione,
And vine-clad Epidaurus; and the youths
Who dwelt in Mases, and Ægina’s isle;
O’er all of these the valiant Diomed
Held rule; and Sthenelus, th’ illustrious son
Of far-fam’d Capaneus; with these, the third,
A godlike warrior came, Euryalus,
Son of Mecistheus, Talaus’ royal son.
Supreme o’er all was valiant Diomed.
In their command came eighty dark-ribb’d ships.

Who in Mycenæ’s well-built fortress dwelt,
And wealthy Corinth, and Cleone fair,
Orneia, and divine Araethure,
And Sicyon, where Adrastus reign’d of old,
And Gonoessa’s promontory steep,
And Hyperesia, and Pellene’s rock;
Ægina, and the scatter’d towns that lie
Along the beach, and wide-spread Helice;
Of these a hundred ships obey’d the rule
Of mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.
The largest and the bravest host was his;
And he himself, in dazzling armour clad,
O’er all the heroes proudly eminent,
Went forth exulting in his high estate,
Lord of the largest host, and chief of chiefs.

Those who in Lacedaemon’s lowland plains,
And who in Sparta and in Phare dwelt,
And who on Messa’s dove-frequented cliffs,
Bryseia, and Ægaea’s lovely vale,
And in Amyclae, and the sea-bathed fort
Of Helos, Œtylus and Laas dwelt;
His valiant brother Menelaus led,
With sixty ships; but ranged apart they lay.
Their chief, himself in martial ardour bold,
Inspiring others, fill’d with fierce desire
The rape of Helen and his wrongs to avenge.

They who in Pylos and Arene dwelt,
And Thyrum, by the ford of Alpheus’ stream,
In Cyparissus and Amphigene,
Pteleon, and lofty Œpus’ well-built fort,
Helos, and Dorium, where the Muses met,
And put to silence Thracian Thamyris,
As from Œchalia, from the royal house
Of Eurytus he came; he, over-bold,
Boasted himself pre-eminent in song,
Ev’n though the daughters of Olympian Jove,
The Muses, were his rivals: they in wrath
Him of his sight at once and powr’r of song
Amerc’d, and bade his hand forget the lyre.
These by Gerenian Nestor all were led,
In fourscore ships and ten in order due.

They of Arcadia, and the realm that lies
Beneath Cyllene’s mountain high, around
The tomb of Æpytus, a warrior race;
The men of Pheneus and Orchomenus
In flocks abounding; who in Ripa dwelt,
In Stratia, and Enispe’s breezy height,
Or Tegea held, and sweet Mantinea,
Stymphalus and Parrhasia; these were led
By Agapenor brave, Anchaeus’ son,
In sixty ships; in each a num’rous crew
Of stout Arcadian youths, to war inur’d.
The ships, wherewith they crossed the dark-blue sea,
Were giv’n by Agamemnon, King of men,
The son of Atreus; for th’ Arcadian youth
Had ne’er to maritime pursuits been train’d.

Who in Buprasium and in Elis dwelt,
Far as Hyrmine, and th’ extremest bounds
Of Myrsinus; and all the realm that lies
Between Aleisium and the Olenian rock;
These by four chiefs were led; and ten swift ships,
By bold Epeians mann’d, each chief obey’d.
Amphimachus and Thalpius were the first,
Sons of two brothers, Cteatus the one,
The other Eurytus, to Actor born;
Next Amarynceus’ son, Diores bold;
The fourth Polyxenus, the godlike son
Of Augeas’ royal heir, Agasthenes.

They of Dulichium, and the sacred isles,
Th’ Echinades, which face, from o’er the sea,
The coast of Elis, were by Meges led,
The son of Phyleus, dear to Jove, in arms
Valiant as Mars; who, with his sire at feud,
Had left his home, and to Dulichium come:
In his command were forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who from warlike Cephalonia came,
And Ithaca, and leafy Neritus,
And Crocyleium; rugged Ægilips,
And Samos, and Zacynthus, and the coast
Of the mainland with its opposing isles;
These in twelve ships, with scarlet-painted bows,
Ulysses led, in council sage as Jove.

Thoas, Andraemon’s son, th’ Ætolians led;
From Pleuron, and Pylone, Olenus,
Chalcis-by-sea, and rocky Calydon:
The race of Œneus was no more; himself,
And fair-hair’d Meleager, both were dead:
Whence all Ætolia’s rule on him was laid.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

The King Idomeneus the Cretans led,
From Cnossus, and Gortyna’s well-wall’d town,
Miletus, and Lycastus’ white-stone cliffs,
Lyctus, and Phaestus, Rhytium, and the rest
Whom Crete from all her hundred cities sent:
These all Idomeneus, a spearman skill’d,
Their King, commanded; and Meriones,
In battle terrible as blood-stain’d Mars.
In their command came fourscore dark-ribb’d ships.

Valiant and tall, the son of Hercules,
Tlepolemus, nine vessels brought from Rhodes,
By gallant Rhodians mann’d, who tripartite
Were settled, and in Ialyssus dwelt,
In Lindus, and Cameirus’ white-stone hills.
These all renown’d Tlepolemus obey’d,
Who to the might of Hercules was born
Of fair Astyoche; his captive she,
When many a goodly town his arms had raz’d,
Was brought from Ephyra, by Selles’ stream.
Rear’d in the royal house, Tlepolemus,
In early youth, his father’s uncle slew,
A warrior once, but now in life’s decline,
Lycimnius; then in haste a fleet he built,
Muster’d a num’rous host; and fled, by sea,
The threaten’d vengeance of the other sons
And grandsons of the might of Hercules.
Long wand’rings past, and toils and perils borne,
To Rhodes he came; his followers, by their tribes,
Three districts form’d; and so divided, dwelt,
Belov’d of Jove, the King of Gods and men,
Who show’r’d upon them boundless store of wealth.

Nireus three well-trimm’d ships from Syme brought;
Nireus, to Charops whom Aglaia bore;
Nireus, the goodliest man of all the Greeks,
Who came to Troy, save Peleus’ matchless son:
But scant his fame, and few the troops he led.

Who in Nisyrus dwelt, and Carpathus,
And Cos, the fortress of Eurypylus,
And in the Casian and Calydnian Isles,
Were by Phidippus led, and Antiphus,
Two sons of Thessalus, Alcides’ son;
With them came thirty ships in order due.

Next those who in Pelasgian Argos dwelt,
And who in Alos, and in Alope,
Trachys, and Phthia, and in Hellas fam’d
For women fair; of these, by various names,
Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenes, known,
In fifty ships, Achilles was the chief.
But from the battle-strife these all abstain’d,
Since none there was to marshal their array.
For Peleus’ godlike son, the swift of foot,
Lay idly in his tent, the loss resenting
Of Brises’ fair-hair’d daughter; whom himself
Had chosen, prize of all his warlike toil,
When he Lyrnessus and the walls of Thebes
O’erthrew, and Mynes and Epistrophus
Struck down, bold warriors both, Evenus’ sons,
Selepius’ royal heir; for her in wrath,
He held aloof, but soon again to appear.

Those in the flow’ry plain of Pyrrhasus,
To Ceres dear, who dwelt; in Phylace,
In Iton, rich in flocks, and, by the sea,
In Antron, and in Pteleon’s grass-clad meads;
These led Protesilaus, famed in arms,
While yet he liv’d; now laid beneath the sod.
In Phylace were left his weeping wife,
And half-built house; him, springing to the shore,
First of the Greeks, a Dardan warrior slew.
Nor were his troops, their leader though they mourn’d,
Left leaderless; the post of high command
Podarces claim’d of right, true plant of Mars,
Iphiclus’ son, the rich Phylacides;
The brother of Protesilaus he,
Younger in years, nor equal in renown;
Yet of a chief no want the forces felt,
Though much they mourn’d their valiant leader slain.
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Those who from Pherae came, beside the lake
Boebeis, and who dwelt in Glaphyrae,
In Boebe, and Iolcos’ well-built fort,
These in eleven ships Eumelus led,
Whom Pelias’ daughter, fairest of her race,
Divine Alcestis to Admetus bore.

Who in Methone and Thaumacia dwelt,
In Meliboea and Olizon’s rock;
These Philoctetes, skilful archer, led.
Sev’n ships were theirs, and ev’ry ship was mann’d
By fifty rowers, skilful archers all.
But he, their chief, was lying, rack’d with pain,
On Lemnos’ sacred isle; there left perforce
In torture from a venomous serpent’s wound:
There he in anguish lay: nor long, ere Greeks
Of royal Philoctetes felt their need.
Yet were his troops, their leader though they mourn’d,
Not leaderless: Oileus’ bastard son,
Medon, of Rhene born, their ranks array’d.

Who in Œchalia, Eurytus’ domain,
In Tricca, and in rough Ithome dwelt,
These Podalirius and Machaon led,
Two skilful leeches, Æsculapius’ sons.
Of these came thirty ships in order due.

Who in Ormenium and Asterium dwelt,
By Hypereia’s fount, and on the heights
Of Titanum’s white peaks, of these was chief
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s gallant son;
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

Who in Argissa and Gyrtona dwelt,
Ortha, Elone, and the white-wall’d town
Of Oloosson, Polypoetes led;
Son of Pirithous, progeny of Jove,
A warrior bold; Hippodamia fair
Him to Pirithous bore, what time he slew
The shaggy Centaurs, and from Pelion’s heights
For refuge ’mid the rude Æthices drove.
Nor he alone; with him to Troy there came
A scion true of Mars, Leonteus, heir
Of nobly-born Coronus, Caeneus’ son.
In their command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

With two and twenty vessels Gouneus came
From Cythus; he the Enienes led,
And the Peraebians’ warlike tribes, and those
Who dwelt around Dodona’s wintry heights,
Or till’d the soil upon the lovely banks
Of Titaresius, who to Peneus pours
The tribute of his clearly-flowing stream;
Yet mingles not with Peneus’ silver waves,
But on the surface floats like oil, his source
From Styx deriving, in whose awful name
Both Gods and men by holiest oaths are bound.

Magnesia’s troops, who dwelt by Peneus’ stream,
Or beneath Pelion’s leafy-quiv’ring shades,
Swift-footed Prothous led, Tenthredon’s son;
In his command came forty dark-ribb’d ships.

These were the leaders and the chiefs of Greece:
Say, Muse, of these, who with th’ Atridae came,
Horses and men, who claim’d the highest praise.
Of steeds, the bravest and the noblest far
Were those Eumelus drove, Admetus’ son:
Both swift as birds, in age and colour match’d,
Alike in height, as measur’d o’er the back;
Both mares, by Phoebus of the silver bow
Rear’d in Pieria, thunderbolts of war.
Of men, while yet Achilles held his wrath,
The mightiest far was Ajax Telamon.
For with Achilles, and the steeds that bore
The matchless son of Peleus, none might vie:
But ’mid his beaked ocean-going ships
He lay, with Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Indignant; while his troops upon the beach
With quoits and jav’lins whil’d away the day,
And feats of archery; their steeds the while
The lotus-grass and marsh-grown parsley cropp’d,
Each standing near their car; the well-wrought cars
Lay all unheeded in the warriors’ tents;
They, inly pining for their godlike chief,
Roam’d listless up and down, nor join’d the fray.

Such was the host, which, like devouring fire,
O’erspread the land; the earth beneath them groan’d:
As when the Lord of thunder, in his wrath,
The earth’s foundations shakes, in Arimi,
Where, buried deep, ’tis said, Typhoeus lies;
So at their coming, groan’d beneath their feet
The earth, as quickly o’er the plain they spread.

To Troy, sent down by aegis-bearing Jove,
With direful tidings storm-swift Iris came.
At Priam’s gate, in solemn conclave met,
Were gather’d all the Trojans, young and old:
Swift Iris stood amidst them, and, the voice
Assuming of Polites, Priam’s son,
The Trojan scout, who, trusting to his speed,
Was posted on the summit of the mound
Of ancient Æsuetes, there to watch
Till from their ships the Grecian troops should march;
His voice assuming, thus the Goddess spoke:
“Old man, as erst in peace, so still thou lov’st
The strife of words; but fearful war is nigh.
Full many a host in line of battle rang’d
My eyes have seen; but such a force as this,
So mighty and so vast, I ne’er beheld:
In number as the leaves, or as the sand,
Against the city o’er the plain they come.
Then, Hector, for to thee I chiefly speak,
This do; thou know’st how various our allies,
Of diff’rent nations and discordant tongues:
Let each then those command o’er whom he reigns,
And his own countrymen in arms array.”
She said; and Hector knew the voice divine,
And all, dissolv’d the council, flew to arms,
The gates were open’d wide; forth pour’d the crowd,
Both foot and horse; and loud the tumult rose.

Before the city stands a lofty mound,
In the mid plain, by open space enclos’d;
Men call it Batiaea; but the Gods
The tomb of swift Myrinna; muster’d there
The Trojans and Allies their troops array’d.

The mighty Hector of the glancing helm,
The son of Priam, led the Trojan host:
The largest and the bravest band were they,
Bold spearmen all, who follow’d him in arms.

Anchises’ valiant son, Æneas, led
The Dardans; him, ’mid Ida’s jutting peaks,
Immortal Venus to Anchises bore,
A Goddess yielding to a mortal’s love:
With him, well skill’d in war, Archilochus
And Acamas, Antenor’s gallant sons.

Who in Zeleia dwelt, at Ida’s foot,
Of Trojan race, a wealthy tribe, who drank
Of dark Æsepus’ waters, these were led
By Pandarus, Lycaon’s noble son,
Taught by Apollo’s self to draw the bow.

Who from Adraste, and Apaesus’ realm,
From Pityeia, and the lofty hill
Tereian came, with linen corslets girt,
Adrastus and Amphius led; two sons
Of Merops of Percote; deeply vers’d
Was he in prophecy; and from the war
Would fain have kept his sons; but they, by fate,
Doom’d to impending death, his caution scorn’d.

Those who from Practium and Percote came,
And who in Sestos and Abydos dwelt,
And in Arisba fair; those Asius led,
The son of Hyrtacus, of heroes chief;
Asius the son of Hyrtacus, who came
From fair Arisba, borne by fiery steeds
Of matchless size and strength, from Selles’ stream.

Hippothous led the bold Pelasgian tribes,
Who dwell in rich Larissa’s fertile soil,
Hippothous and Pylaeus, Lethus’ sons,
The son of Teutamus, Pelasgian chief.

The Thracians, by fast-flowing Hellespont
Encompass’d, Acamas and Peirous brave;
The spear-skill’d Cicones Euphemus led,
Son of Troezenus, Ceus’ highborn son.

From distant Amydon Pyraecmes brought
The Paeon archers from broad Axius’ banks;
Axius, the brightest stream on earth that flows.

The hairy strength of great Pylaemenes
The Paphlagonians led from Eneti
(Whence first appear’d the stubborn race of mules),
Who in Cytorus and in Sesamum,
And round Parthenius’ waters had their home;
Who dwelt in Cromne, and Ægialus,
And on the lofty Erythinian rock.

By Hodius and Epistrophus were brought
From distant Alybe, the wealthy source
Of silver ore, the Alizonian bands.

Chromis the Mysians led, and Ennomus;
A skilful augur, but his augury
From gloomy death to save him nought avail’d;
Slain by the son of Peleus, in the stream,
Where many another Trojan felt his arm.

From far Ascania’s lake, with Phorcys join’d,
The godlike presence of Ascanius brought
The Phrygians, dauntless in the standing fight.

From Lydia came Pylaemenes’ two sons,
Born of the lake Gygeian; Antiphus,
And Mesthles; these Maeonia’s forces led,
Who dwelt around the foot of Tmolus’ hill.

In charge of Nastes came the Carian troops,
Of barbarous speech; who in Miletus dwelt,
And in the dense entangled forest shade
Of Phthira’s hill, and on the lofty ridge
Of Mycale, and by Maeander’s stream;
These came with Nastes and Amphimacus;
Amphimacus and Nastes, Nomion’s sons;
With childish folly to the war he came,
Laden with store of gold; yet nought avail’d
His gold to save him from the doom of death;
Slain by the son of Peleus in the stream;
And all his wealth Achilles bore away.

Sarpedon last, and valiant Glaucus led
The Lycian bands, from distant Lycia’s shore,
Beside the banks of Xanthus’ eddying stream.



ARGUMENT.

THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.


The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon,
between Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the
determination of the war. Iris is sent to call Helen to behold the
fight. She leads her to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his
counsellors, observing the Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom
Helen gives an account of the chief of them. The kings on either part
take the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat. The duel ensues,
wherein Paris being overcome, is snatched away in a cloud by Venus, and
transported to his apartment. She then calls Helen from the walls, and
brings the lovers together. Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians,
demands the restoration of Helen, and the performance of the articles.

The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book. The
scene is sometimes in the field before Troy, and sometimes in Troy
itself.

BOOK III.

WHEN by their sev’ral chiefs the troops were rang’d,
With noise and clamour, as a flight of birds,
The men of Troy advanc’d; as when the cranes,
Flying the wintry storms, send forth on high
Their dissonant clamours, while o’er the ocean stream
They steer their course, and on their pinions bear
Battle and death to the Pygmaean race.

On th’ other side the Greeks in silence mov’d,
Breathing firm courage, bent on mutual aid.
As when the south wind o’er the mountain tops
Spreads a thick veil of mist, the shepherd’s bane,
And friendly to the nightly thief alone,
That a stone’s throw the range of vision bounds;
So rose the dust-cloud, as in serried ranks
With rapid step they mov’d across the plain.
But when th’ opposing forces near were met,
A panther’s skin across his shoulders flung,
Arm’d with his bow and sword, in front of all
Advanc’d the godlike Paris; in his hand
He pois’d two brass-tipp’d jav’lins, and defied
To mortal combat all the chiefs of Greece.

Him when the warlike Menelaus saw
With haughty strides advancing from the crowd;
As when a lion, hunger-pinch’d, espies
Some mighty beast of chase, or antler’d stag,
Or mountain goat, and with exulting spring
Strikes down his prey, and on the carcase feeds,
Unscar’d by baying hounds and eager youths:
So Menelaus saw with fierce delight
The godlike Paris; for he deem’d that now
His vengeance was at hand; and from his car,
Arm’d as he was, he leap’d upon the plain.
But when the godlike Paris saw him spring
Defiant from the ranks, with quailing heart,
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring crowd he sprang,
In fear of death; as when some trav’ller spies,
Coil’d in his path upon the mountain side,
A deadly snake, back he recoils in haste,
His limbs all trembling, and his cheek all pale;
So back recoil’d, in fear of Atreus’ son,
The godlike Paris ’mid the Trojan host.

To whom in stern rebuke thus Hector spoke:
“Thou wretched Paris, though in form so fair,
Thou slave of woman, manhood’s counterfeit!
Would thou hadst ne’er been born, or died at least
Unwedded; so ’twere better far for all,
Than thus to live a scandal and reproach.
Well may the long-hair’d Greeks triumphant boast,
Who think thee, from thine outward show, a chief
Among our warriors; but thou hast in truth
Nor strength of mind, nor courage in the fight.
How was’t that such as thou could e’er induce
A noble band, in ocean-going ships
To cross the main, with men of other lands
Mixing in amity, and bearing thence
A woman, fair of face, by marriage ties
Bound to a race of warriors; to thy sire,
Thy state, thy people, cause of endless grief,
Of triumph to thy foes, contempt to thee!
Durst thou the warlike Menelaus meet,
Thou to thy cost shouldst learn the might of him
Whose bride thou didst not fear to bear away:
Then shouldst thou find of small avail thy lyre,
Or Venus’ gifts of beauty and of grace,
Or, trampled in the dust, thy flowing hair.
But too forbearing are the men of Troy;
Else for the ills that thou hast wrought the state,
Ere now thy body had in stone been cas’d.”

To whom the godlike Paris thus replied:
“Hector, I needs must own thy censure just,
Nor without cause; thy dauntless courage knows
Nor pause nor weariness; but as an axe,
That in a strong man’s hand, who fashions out
Some naval timber, with unbated edge
Cleaves the firm wood, and aids the striker’s force;
Ev’n so unwearied is thy warlike soul.
Yet blame not me for golden Venus’ gifts:
The gifts of Heav’n are not to be despis’d,
Which Heav’n may give, but man could not command.
But if thou wilt that I should dare the fight,
Bid that the Trojans and the Grecians all
Be seated on the ground; and in the midst
The warlike Menelaus and myself
Stand front to front, for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat; and whoe’er shall prove
The better man in conflict, let him bear
The woman and the spoils in triumph home;
While ye, the rest, in peace and friendship sworn,
Shall still possess the fertile plains of Troy;
And to their native Argos they return,
For noble steeds and lovely women fam’d.”

He said, and Hector joy’d to hear his words:
Forth in the midst he stepp’d, and with his spear
Grasp’d by the middle, stay’d the Trojan ranks.
At him the long-haired Grecians bent their bows,
Prompt to assail with arrows and with stones;
But loud the monarch Agamemnon’s voice
Was heard; “Hold, Argives, hold! ye sons of Greece,
Shoot not! for Hector of the glancing helm
Hath, as it seems, some message to impart.”

He said; they held their hands, and silent stood
Expectant, till to both thus Hector spoke:
“Hear now, ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
The words of Paris, cause of all this war.
He asks through me that all the host of Troy
And Grecian warriors shall upon the ground
Lay down their glitt’ring arms; while in the midst
The warlike Menelaus and himself
Stand front to front, for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat; and whoe’er shall prove
The better man in conflict, let him bear
The woman and the spoils in triumph home,
While we, the rest, firm peace and friendship swear.”

Thus Hector spoke; the rest in silence heard;
But Menelaus, bold in fight, replied:
“Hear now my answer; in this quarrel I
May claim the chiefest share; and now I hope
Trojans and Greeks may see the final close
Of all the labours ye so long have borne
T’ avenge my wrong, at Paris’ hand sustain’d.
And of us two whiche’er is doom’d to death,
So let him die! the rest, depart in peace.
Bring then two lambs, one white, the other black,
For Tellus and for Sol; we on our part
Will bring another, for Saturnian Jove:
And let the majesty of Priam too
Appear, himself to consecrate our oaths,
(For reckless are his sons, and void of faith,)
That none Jove’s oath may dare to violate.
For young men’s spirits are too quickly stirr’d;
But in the councils check’d by rev’rend age,
Alike are weigh’d the future and the past,
And for all int’rests due provision made.”

He said, and Greeks and Trojans gladly heard,
In hopes of respite from the weary war.
They rang’d the cars in ranks; and they themselves
Descending doff’d their arms, and laid them down
Close each by each, with narrow space between.
Two heralds to the city Hector sent
To bring the lambs, and aged Priam call;
While Agamemnon to the hollow ships,
Their lamb to bring, in haste Talthybius sent:
He heard, and straight the monarch’s voice obey’d.

Meantime to white-arm’d Helen Iris sped,
The heav’nly messenger: in form she seem’d
Her husband’s sister, whom Antenor’s son,
The valiant Helicaon had to wife,
Laodice, of Priam’s daughters all
Loveliest of face: she in her chamber found
Her whom she sought: a mighty web she wove,
Of double woof and brilliant hues; whereon
Was interwoven many a toilsome strife
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks,
For her encounter’d at the hand of Mars.
Beside her Iris stood, and thus she spoke:
“Come, sister dear, and see the glorious deeds
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks.
They who erewhile, impatient for the fight,
Roll’d o’er the plain the woful tide of war,
Now silent sit, the storm of battle hush’d,
Reclining on their shields, their lances bright
Beside them reared; while Paris in the midst
And warlike Menelaus, stand prepar’d
With the long spear for thee to fight; thyself
The prize of conquest and the victor’s wife.”

Thus as she spoke, in Helen’s breast arose
Fond recollection of her former Lord,
Her home, and parents; o’er her head she threw
A snowy veil; and shedding tender tears
She issu’d forth, not unaccompanied;
For with her went fair Æthra, Pittheus’ child,
And stag-ey’d Clymene, her maidens twain.
They quickly at the Scaean gate arriv’d.

Attending there on aged Priam, sat,
The Elders of the city; Panthous,
And Lampus, and Thymaetes; Clytius,
Bold Icetaon, and Ucalegon,
With sage Antenor, wise in council both:
All these were gather’d at the Scaean gate;
By age exempt from war, but in discourse
Abundant, as the cricket, that on high
From topmost boughs of forest tree sends forth
His delicate music; so on Ilium’s tow’rs
Sat the sage chiefs and councillors of Troy.
Helen they saw, as to the tow’r she came;
And “’tis no marvel,” one to other said,
“The valiant Trojans and the well-greav’d Greeks
For beauty such as this should long endure
The toils of war; for goddess-like she seems;
And yet, despite her beauty, let her go,
Nor bring on us and on our sons a curse.”

Thus they; but aged Priam Helen call’d:
“Come here, my child, and sitting by my side,
From whence thou canst discern thy former Lord,
His kindred, and thy friends (not thee I blame,
But to the Gods I owe this woful war),
Tell me the name of yonder mighty chief
Among the Greeks a warrior brave and strong:
Others in height surpass him; but my eyes
A form so noble never yet beheld,
Nor so august; he moves, a King indeed!”

To whom in answer, Helen, heav’nly fair:
“With rev’rence, dearest father, and with shame
I look on thee: oh would that I had died
That day when hither with thy son I came,
And left my husband, friends, and darling child,
And all the lov’d companions of my youth:
That I died not, with grief I pine away.
But to thy question; I will tell thee true;
Yon chief is Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Wide-reigning, mighty monarch, ruler good,
And valiant warrior; in my husband’s name,
Lost as I am, I call’d him brother once.”

She spoke: th’ old man admiring gaz’d, and cried,
“Oh bless’d Atrides, child of happy fate,
Favour’d of Heav’n! how many noble Greeks
Obey thy rule! In vine-clad Phrygia once
I saw the hosts of Phrygian warriors wheel
Their rapid steeds; and with them, all the bands
Of Otreus, and of Mygdon, godlike King,
Who lay encamp’d beside Sangarius’ stream:
I too with them was number’d, in the day
When met them in the field the Amazons,
The woman-warriors; but their forces all
Reach’d not the number of the keen-ey’d Greeks.”

Ulysses next the old man saw, and ask’d,
“Tell me again, dear child, who this may be,
In stature less than Atreus’ royal son,
But broader-shoulder’d, and of ampler chest.
His arms are laid upon the fertile plain,
But he himself is moving through the ranks,
Inspecting, like a full-fleec’d ram, that moves
Majestic through a flock of snow-white ewes.”

To whom Jove’s offspring, Helen, thus replied:
“The wise Ulysses that, Laertes’ son:
Though bred in rugged Ithaca, yet vers’d
In ev’ry stratagem, and deep device.”
“O woman,” then the sage Antenor said,
“Of these thy words I can the truth avouch;
For hither when on thine account to treat,
Brave Menelaus and Ulysses came,
I lodg’d them in my house, and lov’d them both,
And studied well the form and mind of each.
As they with Trojans mix’d in social guise,
When both were standing, o’er his comrade high
With broad-set shoulders Menelaus stood;
Seated, Ulysses was the nobler form:
Then, in the great Assembly, when to all
Their public speech and argument they fram’d,
In fluent language Menelaus spoke,
In words though few, yet clear; though young in years,
No wordy babbler, wasteful of his speech:
But when the skill’d Ulysses rose to speak,
With down-cast visage would he stand, his eyes
Bent on the ground; the staff he bore, nor back
He wav’d, nor forward, but like one untaught,
He held it motionless; who only saw
Would say that he was mad, or void of sense;
But when his chest its deep-ton’d voice sent forth,
With words that fell like flakes of wintry snow,
No mortal with Ulysses could compare:
Then little reck’d we of his outward show.”

At sight of Ajax next th’ old man enquir’d;
“Who is yon other warrior, brave and strong,
Tow’ring o’er all with head and shoulders broad?”

To whom, in answer, Helen, heav’nly fair:
“Gigantic Ajax that, the prop of Greece;
And by his side Idomeneus of Crete
Stands godlike, circled round by Cretan chiefs.
The warlike Menelaus welcom’d him
Oft in our palace, when from Crete he came.
Now all the other keen-ey’d Greeks I see,
Whom once I knew, and now could call by name;
But two I miss, two captains of the host,
My own two brethren, and my mother’s sons,
Castor and Pollux; Castor, charioteer
Unrivalled, Pollux, matchless pugilist.
In Lacedaemon have they stay’d behind?
Or can it be, in ocean-going ships
That they have come indeed, but shun to join
The fight of warriors, fearful of the shame,
And deep disgrace that on my name attend?”
Thus she; but they beneath the teeming earth
In Lacedaemon lay, their native land.

Meanwhile the heralds through the city bore
The treaty off’rings to the Gods; the lambs,
And genial wine, the produce of the soil,
In goat-skin flasks: therewith a flagon bright,
And cups of gold, Idaeus brought, and stood
Beside the aged King, as thus he spoke:
“Son of Laomedon, arise! the chiefs
Of Trojan warriors and of brass-clad Greeks
Call for thy presence on the battle-plain
To swear a truce; where Paris in the midst
And warlike Menelaus stand prepar’d
With the long spear for Helen and the spoils
Of war to combat, that whoe’er may prove
The better man in fight, may bear away
The woman and the spoils in triumph home;
While we, the rest, in peace and friendship sworn,
Shall still possess the fertile plains of Troy;
And to their native Argos they return.
For noble steeds and lovely women fam’d.”

He said; the old man shuddered at his words:
But to his comrades gave command forthwith.
To yoke his car; and they his word obey’d.
Priam, ascending, gather’d up the reins,
And with Antenor by his side, the twain
Drove through the Scaean gate their flying steeds.

But when between th’ opposing ranks they came,
Alighting from the car, they mov’d on foot
Between the Trojan and the Grecian hosts.
Uprose then Agamemnon, King of men,
Uprose the sage Ulysses; to the front
The heralds brought the off’rings to the Gods,
And in the flagon mix’d the wine, and pour’d
The hallowing water on the monarchs’ hands.
His dagger then the son of Atreus drew,
Suspended, as was wont, beside the hilt
Of his great sword; and from the victim’s head
He cut the sacred lock, which to the chiefs
Of Troy and Greece the heralds portion’d out.
Then with uplifted hands he pray’d aloud:
“O Father Jove! who rul’st from Ida’s height,
Most great! most glorious! and thou Sun, who see’st
And hearest all things! Rivers! and thou Earth!
And ye, who after death beneath the earth
Your vengeance wreak on souls of men forsworn,
Be witness ye, and this our cov’nant guard.
If Menelaus fall by Paris’ hand,
Let him retain both Helen and the spoil,
While in our ships we take our homeward way;
If Paris be by Menelaus slain,
Troy shall surrender Helen and the spoil,
With compensation due to Greece, that so
A record may to future days remain.
But, Paris slain, if Priam and his sons
The promis’d compensation shall withhold,
Then here, my rights in battle to assert,
Will I remain, till I the end achieve.”

Thus as he spoke, across the victims’ throats
He drew the pitiless blade, and on the ground
He laid them gasping, as the stream of life
Pour’d forth, their vigour by the blade subdued.
Then, from the flagon drawn, from out the cups
The wine they pour’d; and to th’ eternal Gods
They pray’d; and thus from Trojans and from Greeks
Arose the joint petition; “Grant, O Jove!
Most great! most glorious! grant, ye heav’nly pow’rs,
That whosoe’er this solemn truce shall break,
Ev’n as this wine we pour, their hearts’ best blood,
Theirs and their children’s, on the earth be pour’d,
And strangers in subjection take their wives!”

Thus they; but Jove, unyielding, heard their pray’r.
The rites perform’d, then aged Priam spoke:
“Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks!
To Ilium’s breezy heights I now withdraw,
For that mine eyes will not endure the sight
Of warlike Menelaus and my son
Engag’d in deadly combat; of the two
Which may be doom’d to death, is only known
To Jove, and to th’ immortal pow’rs of Heav’n.”

Thus spoke the godlike King; and on the car
He plac’d the consecrated lambs; himself
Ascending then, he gather’d up the reins,
And with Antenor by his side, the twain
To Ilium’s walls retrac’d their homeward way.

Then Hector, son of Priam, measur’d out,
With sage Ulysses join’d, th’ allotted space;
Next, in the brass-bound helmet cast the lots,
Which of the two the first should throw the spear.
The crowd, with hands uplifted, to the Gods,
Trojans and Greeks alike, address’d their pray’r:
“O Father Jove! who rul’st from Ida’s height,
Most great! most glorious! grant that whosoe’er
On both our armies hath this turmoil brought
May undergo the doom of death, and we,
The rest, firm peace and lasting friendship swear.”

Thus they; great Hector of the glancing helm,
With eyes averted, shook the casque; and forth
Was cast the lot of Paris; on the ground
The rest lay down by ranks, where near to each
Were rang’d his active steeds, and glitt’ring arms.
Then o’er his shoulders fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
The godlike Paris, donn’d his armour bright:
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
A breastplate guarded, by Lycaon lent,
His brother, but which fitted well his form.
Around his shoulders slung, his sword he bore,
Brass-bladed, silver-studded; then his shield
Weighty and strong; and on his firm-set head
A helm he wore, well wrought, with horsehair plume
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d the firm spear, familiar to his hold.
Prepar’d alike the adverse warrior stood.

They, from the crowd apart their armour donn’d,
Came forth: and each, with eyes of mutual hate,
Regarded each: admiring wonder seiz’d
The Trojan warriors and the well-greav’d Greeks,
As in the centre of the measur’d ground
They stood oppos’d, and pois’d their quiv’ring spears.
First Paris threw his weighty spear, and struck
Fair in the midst Atrides’ buckler round,
But broke not through; upon the stubborn targe
Was bent the lance’s point; then thus to Jove,
His weapon hurling, Menelaus pray’d:
“Great King, on him who wrought me causeless wrong,
On Paris, grant that retribution due
My arm may bring; that men in days to come
May fear their host to injure, and repay
With treach’rous wile his hospitable cares.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his weighty spear:
Full in the midst it struck the buckler round;
Right through the buckler pass’d the sturdy spear,
And through the gorgeous breastplate, and within
Cut through the linen vest; but Paris, back
Inclining, stoop’d, and shunn’d the doom of death.

Atrides then his silver-studded sword
Rearing on high, a mighty blow let fall
On Paris’ helm; but shiv’ring in his hand
In countless fragments new the faithless blade.
Then thus to Jove, with eyes uplift to Heav’n,
Atrides made his moan: “O Father Jove!
Of all the Gods, the most unfriendly thou!
On Paris’ head I hop’d for all his crimes
To wreak my vengeance due; but in my grasp
My faithless sword is shatter’d, and my spear
Hath bootless left my hand, nor reached my foe.”
Then onward rushing, by the horsehair plume
He seiz’d his foeman’s helm, and wrenching round
Dragg’d by main force amid the well-greav’d Greeks.
The broider’d strap, that, pass’d beneath his beard,
The helmet held, the warrior’s throat compress’d:
Then had Atrides dragg’d him from the field,
And endless fame acquir’d; but Venus, child
Of Jove, her fav’rite’s peril quickly saw.
And broke the throttling strap of tough bull’s hide.
In the broad hand the empty helm remained.
The trophy, by their champion whirl’d amid
The well-greav’d Greeks, his eager comrades seiz’d;
While he, infuriate, rush’d with murd’rous aim
On Priam’s son; but him, the Queen of Love
(As Gods can only) from the field convey’d,
Wrapt in a misty cloud; and on a couch,
Sweet perfumes breathing, gently laid him down;
Then went in search of Helen; her she found,
Circled with Trojan dames, on Ilium’s tow’r:
Her by her airy robe the Goddess held,
And in the likeness of an aged dame
Who oft for her, in Sparta when she dwelt,
Many a fair fleece had wrought, and lov’d her well,
Address’d her thus: “Come, Helen, to thy house;
Come, Paris calls thee; in his chamber he
Expects thee, resting on luxurious couch,
In costly garb, with manly beauty grac’d:
Not from the fight of warriors wouldst thou deem
He late had come, but for the dance prepar’d,
Or resting from the dance’s pleasing toil.”

She said, and Helen’s spirit within her mov’d;
And when she saw the Goddess’ beauteous neck,
Her lovely bosom, and her glowing eyes,
She gaz’d in wonder, and address’d her thus:
“Oh why, great Goddess, make me thus thy sport?
Seek’st thou to bear me far away from hence
To some fair Phrygian or Maeonian town,
If there some mortal have thy favour gain’d?
Or, for that Menelaus in the field
Hath vanquish’d Paris, and is willing yet
That I, his bane, should to his home return;
Here art thou found, to weave again thy wiles!
Go then thyself! thy godship abdicate!
Renounce Olympus! lavish here on him
Thy pity and thy care! he may perchance
Make thee his wife—at least his paramour!
But thither go not I! foul shame it were
Again to share his bed; the dames of Troy
Will for a byword hold me; and e’en now
My soul with endless sorrow is possess’d.”

To whom in anger heav’nly Venus spoke:
“Incense me not, poor fool! lest I in wrath
Desert thee quite, and as I heretofore
Have lov’d, so make thee object of my hate;
And kindle, ’twixt the Trojans and the Greeks,
Such bitter feuds, as both shall wreak on thee.”

She said; and trembled Helen, child of Jove;
She rose in silence; in a snow-white veil
All glitt’ring, shrouded; by the Goddess led
She pass’d, unnotic’d by the Trojan dames.
But when to Paris’ splendid house they came,
Thronging around her, her attendants gave
Their duteous service; through the lofty hall
With queenly grace the godlike woman pass’d.
A seat the laughter-loving Goddess plac’d
By Paris’ side; there Helen sat, the child
Of aegis-bearing Jove, with downcast eyes,
Yet with sharp words she thus address’d her Lord:
“Back from the battle? would thou there hadst died
Beneath a warrior’s arm, whom once I call’d
My husband! vainly didst thou boast erewhile
Thine arm, thy dauntless courage, and thy spear
The warlike Menelaus should subdue!
Go now again, and challenge to the fight
The warlike Menelaus. Be thou ware!
I warn thee, pause, ere madly thou presume
With fair-hair’d Menelaus to contend!
Soon shouldst thou fall beneath his conqu’ring spear.”

To whom thus Paris: “Wring not thus my soul
With keen reproaches: now, with Pallas’ aid,
Hath Menelaus conquer’d; but my day
Will come: I too can boast my guardian Gods.
But turn we now to love, and love’s delights;
For never did thy beauty so inflame
My sense; not when from Lacedaemon first
I bore thee in my ocean-going ships,
And revell’d in thy love on Cranae’s isle,
As now it fills my soul with fond desire.”

He said, and led her to the nuptial couch;
Her Lord she follow’d; and while there reclin’d
Upon the richly-inlaid couch they lay,
Atrides, like a lion baffled, rush’d
Amid the crowd, if haply he might find
The godlike Paris; but not one of all
The Trojans and their brave allies could aid
The warlike Menelaus in his search;
Not that, for love, would any one that knew
Have screen’d him from his anger, for they all
Abhorr’d him as the shade of death: then thus
Outspoke great Agamemnon, King of men:
“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies!
With warlike Menelaus rests, ’tis plain,
The prize of vict’ry: then surrender ye
The Argive Helen and the spoils of war,
With compensation due to Greece, that so
A record may to future days remain.”

Thus he; the Greeks, assenting, cheer’d his words.



ARGUMENT.

THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE.


The Gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree
upon the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break
the truce. She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is
wounded, but cured by Machaon. In the mean time some of the Trojan
troops attack the Greeks. Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts
of a good general; he reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some
by praises, and others by reproofs. Nestor is particularly celebrated
for his military discipline. The battle joins, and great numbers are
slain on both sides.

The same day continues through this, as through the last book; as it
does also through the two following, and almost to the end of the
seventh book. The scene is wholly in the field before Troy.

BOOK IV.

On golden pavement, round the board of Jove,
The Gods were gather’d; Hebe in the midst
Pour’d the sweet nectar; they, in golden cups,
Each other pledg’d, as down they look’d on Troy.
Then Jove, with cutting words and taunting tone,
Began the wrath of Juno to provoke:
“Two Goddesses for Menelaus fight,
Thou, Juno, Queen of Argos, and with thee
Minerva, shield of warriors; but ye two
Sitting aloof, well-pleased it seems, look on;
While laughter-loving Venus, at the side
Of Paris standing, still averts his fate,
And rescues, when, as now, expecting death.
To warlike Menelaus we decree,
Of right, the vict’ry; but consult we now
What may the issue be; if we shall light
Again the name of war and discord fierce,
Or the two sides in peace and friendship join.
For me, if thus your gen’ral voice incline,
Let Priam’s city stand, and Helen back
To warlike Menelaus be restor’d.”

So spoke the God; but seated side by side,
Juno and Pallas glances interchang’d
Of ill portent for Troy; Pallas indeed
Sat silent; and, though inly wroth with Jove,
Yet answer’d not a word; but Juno’s breast
Could not contain her rage, and thus she spoke:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
How wouldst thou render vain, and void of fruit,
My weary labour and my horses’ toil,
To stir the people, and on Priam’s self,
And Priam’s offspring, bring disastrous fate?
Do as thou wilt! yet not with our consent.”

To whom, in wrath, the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Revengeful! how have Priam and his sons
So deeply injur’d thee, that thus thou seek’st
With unabated anger to pursue,
Till thou o’erthrow, the strong-built walls of Troy?
Couldst thou but force the gates, and entering in
On Priam’s mangled flesh, and Priam’s sons,
And Trojans all, a bloody banquet make.
Perchance thy fury might at length be stayed.
But have thy will, lest this in future times
’Twixt me and thee be cause of strife renew’d.
Yet hear my words, and ponder what I say:
If e’er, in times to come, my will should be
Some city to destroy, inhabited
By men beloved of thee, seek not to turn
My wrath aside, but yield, as I do now,
Consenting, but with heart that ill consents;
For of all cities fair, beneath the sun
And starry Heaven, the abode of mortal men,
None to my soul was dear as sacred Troy,
And Priam’s self, and Priam’s warrior race.
For with drink-off’rings due, and fat of lambs,
My altar still hath at their hands been fed;
Such honour hath to us been ever paid.”

To whom the stag-ey’d Juno thus replied:
“Three cities are there, dearest to my heart;
Argos, and Sparta, and the ample streets
Of rich Mycenæ; work on them thy will;
Destroy them, if thine anger they incur;
I will not interpose, nor hinder thee;
Mourn them I shall; reluctant see their fall,
But not resist; for sovereign is thy will.
Yet should my labours not be fruitless all;
For I too am a God; my blood is thine;
Worthy of honour, as the eldest born
Of deep-designing Saturn, and thy wife;
Thine, who o’er all th’ Immortals reign’st supreme.
But yield we each to other, I to thee,
And thou to me; the other Gods will all
By us be rul’d. On Pallas then enjoin
That to the battle-field of Greece and Troy
She haste, and so contrive that Trojans first
May break the treaty, and the Greeks assail.”

She said: the Sire of Gods and men complied,
And thus with winged words to Pallas spoke:
“Go to the battle-field of Greece and Troy
In haste, and so contrive that Trojans first
May break the treaty, and the Greeks assail.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal,
And from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped;
Like to a meteor, that, of grave portent
To warring armies or sea-faring men,
The son of deep-designing Saturn sends,
Bright-flashing, scatt’ring fiery sparks around,
The blue-ey’d Goddess darted down to earth,
And lighted in the midst; amazement held
The Trojan warriors and the well-greav’d Greeks;
And one to other look’d and said, “What means
This sign? Must fearful battle rage again,
Or may we hope for gentle peace from Jove,
Who to mankind dispenses peace and war?”
Such was the converse Greeks and Trojans held.
Pallas meanwhile, amid the Trojan host,
Clad in the likeness of Antenor’s son,
Laodocus, a spearman stout and brave,
Search’d here and there, if haply she might find
The godlike Pandarus; Lycaon’s son
She found, of noble birth and stalwart form,
Standing, encircled by his sturdy band
Of bucklered followers from Æsepus’ stream,
She stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Wilt thou by me be ruled, Lycaon’s son?
For durst thou but at Menelaus shoot
Thy winged arrow, great would be thy fame,
And great thy favour with the men of Troy,
And most of all with Paris; at his hand
Thou shalt receive rich guerdon, when he hears
That warlike Menelaus, by thy shaft
Subdued, is laid upon the fun’ral pyre.
Bend then thy bow at Atreus’ glorious son,
Vowing to Phoebus, Lycia’s guardian God,
The Archer-King, to pay of firstling lambs
An ample hecatomb, when home return’d
In safety to Zeleia’s sacred town.”
Thus she; and, fool, he listen’d to her words.
Straight he uncas’d his polish’d bow, his spoil
Won from a mountain ibex, which himself,
In ambush lurking, through the breast had shot,
True to his aim, as from behind a crag
He came in sight; prone on the rock he fell;
With horns of sixteen palms his head was crown’d;
These deftly wrought a skilful workman’s hand,
And polish’d smooth, and tipp’d the ends with gold.
He bent, and resting on the ground his bow,
Strung it anew; his faithful comrades held
Their shields before him, lest the sons of Greece
Should make their onset ere his shaft could reach
The warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son.
His quiver then withdrawing from its case,
With care a shaft he chose, ne’er shot before,
Well-feather’d, messenger of pangs and death;
The stinging arrow fitted to the string,
And vow’d to Phoebus, Lycia’s guardian God,
The Archer-King, to pay of firstling lambs
An ample hecatomb, when home return’d
In safety to Zeleia’s sacred town.
At once the sinew and the notch he drew;
The sinew to his breast, and to the bow
The iron head; then, when the mighty bow
Was to a circle strain’d, sharp rang the horn,
And loud the sinew twang’d, as tow’rd the crowd
With deadly speed the eager arrow sprang.

Nor, Menelaus, was thy safety then
Uncar’d for of the Gods; Jove’s daughter first,
Pallas, before thee stood, and turn’d aside
The pointed arrow; turn’d it so aside
As when a mother from her infant’s cheek,
Wrapt in sweet slumbers, brushes off a fly;
Its course she so directed that it struck
Just where the golden clasps the belt restrain’d,
And where the breastplate, doubled, check’d its force.
On the close-fitting belt the arrow struck;
Right through the belt of curious workmanship
It drove, and through the breastplate richly wrought,
And through the coat of mail he wore beneath,
His inmost guard and best defence to check
The hostile weapons’ force; yet onward still
The arrow drove, and graz’d the hero’s flesh.
Forth issued from the wound the crimson blood.
As when some Carian or Maeonian maid,
With crimson dye the ivory stains, designed
To be the cheek-piece of a warrior’s steed,
By many a valiant horseman coveted,
As in the house it lies, a monarch’s boast,
The horse adorning, and the horseman’s pride:
So, Menelaus, then thy graceful thighs,
And knees, and ancles, with thy blood were dy’d.

Great Agamemnon shudder’d as he saw
The crimson drops out-welling from the wound;
Shudder’d the warlike Menelaus’ self;
But when not buried in his flesh he saw
The barb and sinew, back his spirit came.

Then deeply groaning, Agamemnon spoke,
As Menelaus by the hand he held,
And with him groan’d his comrades: “Brother dear,
I wrought thy death when late, on compact sworn,
I sent thee forth alone for Greece to fight;
Wounded by Trojans, who their plighted faith
Have trodden under foot; but not in vain
Are solemn cov’nants and the blood of lambs,
The treaty wine outpoured, and hand-plight given,
Wherein men place their trust; if not at once,
Yet soon or late will Jove assert their claim;
And heavy penalties the perjured pay
With their own blood, their children’s, and their wives’.
So in my inmost soul full well I know
The day shall come when this imperial Troy,
And Priam’s race, and Priam’s royal self,
Shall in one common ruin be o’erthrown;
And Saturn’s son himself, high-throned Jove,
Who dwells in Heav’n, shall in their faces flash
His aegis dark and dread, this treach’rous deed
Avenging; this shall surely come to pass.
But, Menelaus, deep will be my grief,
If thou shouldst perish, meeting thus thy fate.
To thirsty Argos should I then return
By foul disgrace o’erwhelm’d; for, with thy fall,
The Greeks will mind them of their native land;
And as a trophy to the sons of Troy
The Argive Helen leave; thy bones meanwhile
Shall moulder here beneath a foreign soil.
Thy work undone; and with insulting scorn
Some vaunting Trojan, leaping on the tomb
Of noble Menelaus, thus shall say:
‘On all his foes may Agamemnon so
His wrath accomplish, who hath hither led
Of Greeks a mighty army, all in vain;
And bootless home with empty ships hath gone,
And valiant Menelaus left behind;’
Thus when men speak, gape, earth, and hide my shame.”

To whom the fair-hair’d Menelaus thus
With, cheering words: “Fear not thyself, nor cause
The troops to fear: the arrow hath not touch’d
A vital part: the sparkling belt hath first
Turn’d it aside, the doublet next beneath,
And coat of mail, the work of arm’rer’s hands.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Dear Menelaus, may thy words be true!
The leech shall tend thy wound, and spread it o’er
With healing ointments to assuage the pain.”

He said, and to the sacred herald call’d:
“Haste thee, Talthybius! summon with all speed
The son of Æsculapius, peerless leech,
Machaon; bid him hither haste to see
The warlike Menelaus, chief of Greeks,
Who by an arrow from some practis’d hand,
Trojan or Lycian, hath receiv’d a wound;
A cause of boast to them, to us of grief.”

He said, nor did the herald not obey,
But through the brass-clad ranks of Greece he pass’d,
In search of brave Machaon; him he found
Standing, by buckler’d warriors bold begirt,
Who follow’d him from Trica’s grassy plains.
He stood beside him, and address’d him thus:
“Up, son of Æsculapius! Atreus’ son,
The mighty monarch, summons thee to see
The warlike Menelaus, chief of Greeks,
Who by an arrow from some practis’d hand,
Trojan or Lycian, hath receiv’d a wound;
A cause of boast to them, to us of grief.”

Thus he; and not unmov’d Machaon heard:
They thro’ the crowd, and thro’ the wide-spread host,
Together took their way; but when they came
Where fair-hair’d Menelaus, wounded, stood,
Around him in a ring the best of Greece,
And in the midst the godlike chief himself,
From the close-fitting belt the shaft he drew,
Breaking the pointed barbs; the sparkling belt
He loosen’d, and the doublet underneath,
And coat of mail, the work of arm’rer’s hand.
But when the wound appear’d in sight, where struck
The stinging arrow, from the clotted blood
He cleans’d it, and applied with skilful hand
The herbs of healing power, which Chiron erst
In friendly guise upon his sire bestowed.

While round the valiant Menelaus they
Were thus engag’d, advanc’d the Trojan hosts:
They donn’d their arms, and for the fight prepar’d.
In Agamemnon then no trace was seen
Of laggard sloth, no shrinking from the fight,
But full of ardour to the field he rush’d.
He left his horses and brass-mounted car
(The champing horses by Eurymedon,
The son of Ptolemy, Peiraeus’ son,
Were held aloof), but with repeated charge
Still to be near at hand, when faint with toil
His limbs should fail him marshalling his host.
Himself on foot the warrior ranks array’d;
With cheering words addressing whom he found
With zeal preparing for the battle-field:
“Relax not, valiant friends, your warlike toil;
For Jove to falsehood ne’er will give his aid;
And they who first, regardless of their oaths,
Have broken truce, shall with their flesh themselves
The vultures feed, while we, their city raz’d,
Their wives and helpless children bear away.”

But whom remiss and shrinking from the war
He found, with keen rebuke he thus assail’d;
“Ye wretched Greeks, your country’s foul reproach,
Have ye no sense of shame? Why stand ye thus
Like timid fawns, that in the chase run down,
Stand all bewildered, spiritless and tame?
So stand ye now, nor dare to face the fight.
What! will ye wait the Trojans’ near approach,
Where on the beach, beside the hoary deep,
Our goodly ships are drawn, and see if Jove
Will o’er you his protecting hand extend?”

As thus the King the serried ranks review’d,
He came where thronging round their skilful chief
Idomeneus, the warlike bands of Crete
Were arming for the fight; Idomeneus,
Of courage stubborn as the forest boar,
The foremost ranks array’d; Meriones
The rearmost squadrons had in charge; with joy
The monarch Agamemnon saw, and thus
With accents bland Idomeneus address’d:

“Idomeneus, above all other Greeks,
In battle and elsewhere, I honour thee;
And in the banquet, where the noblest mix
The ruddy wine for chiefs alone reserved,
Though others drink their share, yet by thy side
Thy cup, like mine, still new replenished stands
To drink at pleasure. Up then to the fight,
And show thyself the warrior that thou art.”

To whom the Cretan King, Idomeneus:
“In me, Atrides, thou shalt ever find,
As at the first I promis’d, comrade true;
But go, and stir the other long-haired Greeks
To speedy battle; since the Trojans now
The truce have broken; and defeat and death
Must wait on those who have their oaths forsworn.”

He said, and Agamemnon went his way
Rejoicing; through the crowd he pass’d, and came
Where stood th’ Ajaces; them, in act to arm,
Amid a cloud of infantry he found;
And as a goat-herd from his watch-tow’r crag
Beholds a cloud advancing o’er the sea,
By Zephyr’s breath impell’d; as from afar
He gazes, black as pitch, it sweeps along
O’er the dark ocean’s face, and with it brings
A hurricane of rain; he, shudd’ring, sees,
And drives his flock beneath the shelt’ring cave:
So thick and dark, about th’ Ajaces stirr’d,
Impatient for the war, the stalwart youths,
Black masses, bristling close with spear and shield.

Well pleas’d, the monarch Agamemnon saw,
And thus address’d them: “Valiant chiefs, to you,
The leaders of the brass-clad Greeks, I give
(’Twere needless and unseemly) no commands;
For well ye understand your troops to rouse
To deeds of dauntless courage; would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, that such mind
As is in you, in all the camp were found;
Then soon should Priam’s lofty city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.”

Thus saying, them he left, and onward mov’d.
Nestor, the smooth-tongu’d Pylian chief, he found
The troops arraying, and to valiant deeds
His friends encouraging; stout Pelagon,
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, warlike Prince,
And Bias bold, his people’s sure defence.
In the front rank, with chariot and with horse,
He plac’d the car-borne warriors; in the rear,
Num’rous and brave, a cloud of infantry,
Compactly mass’d, to stem the tide of war,
Between the two he plac’d th’ inferior troops,
That e’en against their will they needs must fight.
The horsemen first he charg’d, and bade them keep
Their horses well in hand, nor wildly rush
Amid the tumult: “See,” he said, “that none,
In skill or valour over-confident,
Advance before his comrades, nor alone
Retire; for so your lines were easier forc’d;
But ranging each beside a hostile car,
Thrust with your spears; for such the better way;
By men so disciplin’d, in elder days
Were lofty walls and fenced towns destroy’d.”

Thus he, experienc’d in the wars of old;
Well pleas’d, the monarch Agamemnon saw,
And thus address’d him; “Would to Heav’n, old man,
That, as thy spirit, such too were thy strength
And vigour of thy limbs; but now old age,
The common lot of mortals, weighs thee down;
Would I could see some others in thy place,
And thou couldst still be numbered with the young!”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Atrides, I too fain would see restor’d
The strength I once possess’d, what time I slew
The godlike Ereuthalion; but the Gods
On man bestow not all their gifts at once;
I then was young, and now am bow’d with age,
Yet with the chariots can I still go forth,
And aid with sage advice: for such the right
And privilege of age; to hurl the spear
Belongs to younger men, who after me
Were born, who boast their vigour unimpair’d.”

He said; and Agamemnon went his way,
Rejoicing: to Menestheus next he came,
The son of Peteus, charioteer renown’d;
Him found he, circled by th’ Athenian bands,
The raisers of the war-cry; close beside
The sage Ulysses stood, around him rang’d,
Not unrenown’d, the Cephalonian troops:
The sound of battle had not reach’d their ears;
For but of late the Greek and Trojan hosts
Were set in motion; they expecting stood,
Till other Grecian columns should advance,
Assail the Trojans, and renew the war.

Atrides saw, and thus, reproachful, spoke:
“O son of Peteus, Heav’n-descended King!
And thou too, master of all tricky arts,
Why, ling’ring, stand ye thus aloof, and wait
For others coming? ye should be the first
The hot assault of battle to confront;
For ye are first my summons to receive,
Whene’er the honour’d banquet we prepare:
And well ye like to eat the sav’ry meat,
And, at your will, the luscious wine-cups drain:
Now stand ye here, and unconcern’d would see
Ten columns pass before you to the fight.”

To whom, with stern regard, Ulysses thus:
“What words have pass’d the barrier of thy lips,
Atrides? how with want of warlike zeal
Canst thou reproach us? when the Greeks again
The furious war shall waken, thou shalt see
(If that thou care to see) amid the ranks
Of Troy, the father of Telemachus
In the fore-front: thy words are empty wind.”

Atrides saw him chafed, and smiling, thus
Recalled his former words: “Ulysses sage,
Laertes’ high-born son, not over-much
I give thee blame, or orders; for I know
Thy mind to gentle counsels is inclin’d;
Thy thoughts are one with mine; then come, henceforth
Shall all be well; and if a hasty word
Have pass’d, may Heaven regard it as unsaid.”

Thus saying, them he left, and onward mov’d.
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed,
Standing he found amid his warlike steeds
And well-built cars; beside him, Sthenelus,
The son of Capaneus; Atrides saw,
And thus address’d him with reproachful words:
“Alas! thou son of Tydeus, wise and bold,
Why crouch with fear? why thus appall’d survey
The pass of war? not so had Tydeus crouch’d;
His hand was ever ready from their foes
To guard his comrades; so, at least, they say
Whose eyes beheld his labours; I myself
Nor met him e’er, nor saw; but, by report,
Thy father was the foremost man of men.
A stranger to Mycenæ once he came,
With godlike Polynices; not at war,
But seeking succour for the troops that lay
Encamp’d before the sacred walls of Thebes;
For reinforcements earnestly they sued;
The boon they ask’d was granted them, but Jove
With unpropitious omens turn’d them back.
Advancing on their journey, when they reach’d
Asopus’ grassy banks and rushes deep,
The Greeks upon a mission Tydeus sent:
He went; and many Thebans there he found
Feasting in Eteocles’ royal hall:
Amid them all, a stranger and alone,
He stood unterrified, and challeng’d all
To wrestle with him, and with ease o’erthrew:
So mighty was the aid that Pallas gave.
Whereat indignant, they, on his return,
An ambush set, of fifty chosen youths;
Two were their leaders; Haemon’s godlike son,
Maeon, and Lycophontes, warrior brave,
Son of Autophonus; and these too far’d
But ill at Tydeus’ hand; he slew them all:
Maeon alone, obedient to the Gods,
He spar’d, and bade him bear the tidings home.
Such Tydeus was: though greater in debate,
His son will never rival him in arms.”

He said: brave Diomed in silence heard,
Submissive to the monarch’s stern rebuke;
Then answer’d thus the son of Capaneus:
“Atrides, speak not falsely: well thou know’st
The truth, that we our fathers far surpass.
The seven-gated city, Thebes, we took,
With smaller force beneath the wall of Mars,
Trusting to heav’nly signs, and fav’ring Jove,
Where they by blind, presumptuous folly fail’d;
Then equal not our fathers’ deeds with ours.”

To whom thus Diomed, with stern regard:
“Father, be silent; hearken to my words:
I blame not Agamemnon, King of men,
Who thus to battle stirs the well-greav’d Greeks:
His will the glory be if we o’ercome
The valiant Trojans, and their city take;
Great too his loss if they o’er us prevail:
Then come, let us too for the fight prepare.”

He said; and from the car leap’d down in arms:
Fierce rang the armour on the warrior’s breast,
That ev’n the stoutest heart might quail with fear.

As by the west wind driv’n, the ocean waves
Dash forward on the far-resounding shore,
Wave upon wave; first curls the ruffled sea
With whit’ning crests; anon with thund’ring roar
It breaks upon the beach, and from the crags
Recoiling flings in giant curves its head
Aloft, and tosses high the wild sea-spray:
Column on column, so the hosts of Greece
Pour’d, ceaseless, to the war; to each the chiefs
Their orders gave; the rest in silence mov’d:
Nor would ye deem that mighty mass endued
With power of speech, so silently they moved
In awe of their great captains: far around
Flashed the bright armour they were girt withal.

On th’ other hand, the Trojans, as the flocks
That in the court-yard of some wealthy Lord
In countless numbers stand, at milking-time,
Incessant bleating, as their lambs they hear;
So rose their mingled clamours through the camp;
For not one language nor one speech was there,
But many nations call’d from distant lands:
These Mars inspir’d, and those the blue-ey’d Maid;
And Fear, and Flight, and Discord unappeas’d,
Of blood-stain’d Mars the sister and the friend:
“With humble crest at first, anon her head,
“While yet she treads the earth, affronts the skies.
The gage of battle in the midst she threw,
Strode through the crowd, and woe to mortals wrought.
When to the midst they came, together rush’d
Bucklers and lances, and the furious might
Of mail-clad warriors; bossy shield on shield
Clatter’d in conflict; loud the clamour rose.
Then rose too mingled shouts and groans of men
Slaying and slain; the earth ran red with blood.
As when, descending from the mountain’s brow,
Two wintry torrents, from their copious source
Pour downward to the narrow pass, where meet
Their mingled waters in some deep ravine,
Their weight of flood; on the far mountain’s side
The shepherd hears the roar; so loud arose
The shouts and yells of those commingling hosts.

First ’mid the foremost ranks Antilochus
A Trojan warrior, Echepolus, slew,
A crested chief, Thalesius’ noble son.
Beneath his horsehair-plumed helmet’s peak
The sharp spear struck; deep in his forehead fix’d
It pierc’d the bone; then darkness veil’d his eyes,
And, like a tow’r, amid the press he fell.
Him Elephenor, brave Abantian chief,
Son of Chalcodon, seizing by the feet,
Dragg’d from beneath the darts, in haste to strip
His armour off; but short-liv’d was th’ attempt;
For bold Agenor mark’d him as he drew
The corpse aside, and with his brass-tipp’d spear
Thrust through his flank, unguarded, as he stoop’d,
Beside his shield; and slack’d his limbs in death.
The spirit was fled; but hotly o’er him rag’d
The war of Greeks and Trojans; fierce as wolves
They fought, man struggling hand to hand with man.

Then Ajax Telamon a stalwart youth,
Son of Anthemion, Simoisius, slew;
Whose mother gave him birth on Simois’ banks,
When with her parents down from Ida’s heights
She drove her flock; thence Simoisius nam’d:
Not destined he his parents to repay
Their early care; for short his term of life,
By godlike Ajax’ mighty spear subdued.
Him, to the front advancing, in the breast,
By the right nipple, Ajax struck; right through,
From front to back, the brass-tipp’d spear was driv’n,
Out through the shoulder; prone in dust he fell;
As some tall poplar, grown in marshy mead,
Smooth-stemm’d, with branches tapering tow’rd the head;
Which with the biting axe the wheelwright fells,
To bend the felloes of his well-built car;
Sapless, beside the river, lies the tree;
So lay the youthful Simoisius, felled
By godlike Ajax’ hand. At him, in turn,
The son of Priam, Antiphus, encas’d
In radiant armour, from amid the crowd
His jav’lin threw; his mark, indeed, he miss’d;
But through the groin Ulysses’ faithful friend,
Leucus, he struck, in act to bear away
The youthful dead; down on the corpse he fell,
And, dying, of the dead relax’d his grasp.
Fierce anger, at his comrade’s slaughter, filled
Ulysses’ breast; in burnished armour clad
Forward he rush’d; and standing near, around
He look’d, and pois’d on high his glitt’ring lance:
Beneath his aim the Trojans back recoil’d;
Nor vainly flew the spear; Democoon,
A bastard son of Priam, met the blow:
He from Abydos came, his high-bred mares
There left to pasture; him Ulysses, fill’d
With fury at his lov’d companion’s death,
Smote on the head; through either temple pass’d
The pointed spear, and darkness veil’d his eyes.
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
At this the Trojan chiefs, and Hector’s self,
’Gan to give ground: the Greeks with joyful shouts
Seiz’d on the dead, and forward urg’d their course.
From Ilium’s heights Apollo, filled with wrath,
Look’d down, and to the Trojans shouted loud:
“Uprouse ye, valiant Trojans! give not way
Before the Greeks; their bodies are not stone,
Nor iron, to defy your trenchant swords;
And great Achilles, fair-hair’d Thetis’ son,
Fights not, but o’er his anger broods apart.”
So from the city call’d the heav’nly voice;
The Greeks, meanwhile, all-glorious Pallas fir’d,
Mov’d ’mid the tumult, and the laggards rous’d.

Then fell Diores, Amarynceus’ son:
A rugged fragment of a rock had crush’d
His ancle and right leg; from Ænon came
The Thracian chief who hurl’d it, Peirous, son
Of Imbrasus; the tendons both, and bones,
The huge mass shatter’d; backward in the dust
He fell, both hands extending to his friends,
Gasping his life away; then quick up-ran
He who the blow had dealt, and with his spear
Thrust through him, by the navel; from the wound
His bowels gush’d, and darkness veil’d his eyes.

But he, advancing, through the breast was struck
Above the nipple, by th’ Ætolian chief.
Thoas; and through his lungs the spear was driv’n.
Thoas approach’d, and from his breast withdrew
The sturdy spear, and with his sharp-edg’d sword
Across his waistband gave the mortal stroke:
Yet could not touch his arms; for all around
The Thracian warriors, with, their tufted crowns,
Their long spears held before them, him, though stout,
And strong, and valiant, kept at bay; perforce
He yielded; and thus side by side were laid
The two, the Thracian and th’ Epeian chief;
And round them many a valiant soldier lay.

Well might the deeds achieved that day deserve
His praise, who through that bloody field might pass
By sword or spear unwounded, by the hand
Of Pallas guarded from the weapon’s flight;
For many a Trojan, many a Greek, that day
Prone in the dust, and side by side, were laid.



ARGUMENT.

THE ACTS OF DIOMED.


Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day’s battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables
him to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending
with any of the former, excepting Venus. Æneas joins Pandarus to
oppose him, Pandarus is killed, and Æneas in great danger but for the
assistance of Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is
wounded on the hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and,
at length, carries off Æneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple
of Pergamus. Mars rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a
stand. In the mean time Æneas is restored to the field, and they
overthrow several of the Greeks; among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by
Sarpedon. Juno and Minerva descend to resist Mars; the latter incites
Diomed to go against that god; he wounds him, and sends him groaning to
heaven.

The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same as
in the former.

BOOK V.

Such strength, and courage then to Diomed,
The son of Tydeus, Pallas gave, as rais’d,
’Mid all the Greeks, the glory of his name.
Forth from his helm and shield a fiery light
There flash’d, like autumn’s star, that brightest shines
When newly risen from his ocean bath.
So from the warrior’s head and shoulders flash’d
That fiery light, as to the midst he urg’d
His furious course, where densest masses fought.

There was one Dares ’mid the Trojan host,
The priest of Vulcan, rich, of blameless life;
Two gallant sons he had, Idaeus nam’d,
And Phegeus, skill’d in all the points of war.
These, parted from the throng, the warrior met;
They on their car, while he on foot advanc’d.
When near they came, first Phegeus threw his spear;
O’er the left shoulder of Tydides pass’d
The erring weapon’s point, and miss’d its mark.
His pond’rous spear in turn Tydides threw,
And not in vain; on Phegeus’ breast it struck,
Full in the midst, and hurl’d him from the car.
Idaeus from the well-wrought chariot sprang,
And fled, nor durst his brother’s corpse defend.
Nor had he so escap’d the doom of death,
But Vulcan bore him safely from the field,
In darkness shrouded, that his aged sire
Might not be wholly of his sons bereav’d.
The car Tydides to his comrades gave,
And bade them to the ships the horses drive.

Now when the Trojans Dares’ sons beheld,
The one in flight, the other stretch’d in death,
Their spirits within them quail’d; but Pallas took
The hand of Mars, and thus address’d the God:
“Mars, Mars, thou bane of mortals, blood-stain’d Lord,
Razer of cities, wherefore leave we not
The Greeks and Trojans to contend, and see
To which the sire of all will vict’ry give;
While we retire, and shun the wrath of Jove?”

Thus saying, from the battle Mars she led,
And plac’d him on Scamander’s steepy banks.

The Greeks drove back the Trojan host; the chiefs
Slew each his victim; Agamemnon first,
The mighty monarch, from his chariot hurl’d
Hodius, the sturdy Halizonian chief,
Him, as he turn’d, between the shoulder-blades
The jav’lin struck, and through his chest was driv’n;
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

On Phaestus, Borus’ son, Maeonian chief,
Who from the fertile plains of Tarna came,
Then sprang Idomeneus; and as he sought
To mount upon his car, the Cretan King
Through his right shoulder drove the pointed spear;
He fell; the shades of death his eyes o’erspread,
And of his arms the followers stripp’d his corpse.

The son of Atreus, Menelaus, slew
Scamandrius, son of Strophius, sportsman keen,
In woodcraft skilful; for his practis’d hand
Had by Diana’s self been taught to slay
Each beast of chase the mountain forest holds.
But nought avail’d him then the Archer-Queen
Diana’s counsels, nor his boasted art
Of distant aim; for as he fled, the lance
Of Menelaus, Atreus’ warlike son,
Behind his neck, between the shoulder-blades,
His flight arresting, through his chest was driv’n.
Headlong he fell, and loud his armour rang.

Phereclus by Meriones was slain,
Son of Harmonides, whose practis’d hand
Knew well to fashion many a work of art;
By Pallas highly favour’d; he the ships
For Paris built, first origin of ill,
Freighted with evil to the men of Troy,
And to himself, who knew not Heav’n’s decrees.
Him, in his headlong flight, in hot pursuit
Meriones o’ertook, and thrust his lance
Through his right flank; beneath the bone was driv’n
The spear, and pierc’d him through: prone on his knees,
Groaning, he fell, and death his eyelids clos’d.

Meges Pedaeus slew, Antenor’s son,
A bastard born, but by Theano rear’d
With tender care, and nurtur’d as her son,
With her own children, for her husband’s sake.
Him, Phyleus’ warrior son, approaching near,
Thrust through the junction of the head and neck;
Crash’d through his teeth the spear beneath the tongue;
Prone in the dust he gnash’d the brazen point.

Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son,
Hypsenor slew, the worthy progeny
Of Dolopion brave; Scamander’s priest,
And by the people as a God rever’d:
Him, as he fled before him, from behind
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son,
Smote with the sword; and from the shoulder-point
The brawny arm he sever’d; to the ground
Down fell the gory hand; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous doom, his eyelids clos’d.

Thus labour’d they amid the stubborn fight;
But of Tydides none might say to whom
His arm belong’d, or whether with the hosts
Of Troy or Greece he mingled in the fight:
Hither and thither o’er the plain he rush’d,
Like to a wintry stream, that brimming o’er
Breaks down its barriers in its rapid course;
Nor well-built bridge can stem the flood, nor fence
guards the fertile fields, as down it pours
Its sudden torrent, swoll’n with rain from Heav’n,
And many a goodly work of man destroys:
So back were borne before Tydides’ might
The serried ranks of Troy, nor dar’d await,
Despite their numbers, his impetuous charge.

Him when Lycaon’s noble son beheld
Careering o’er the plain, the serried ranks
Driving before him, quick at Tydeus’ son
He bent his bow; and onward as he rush’d,
On the right shoulder, near the breastplate’s joint,
The stinging arrow struck; right through it pass’d,
And held its way, that blood the breastplate stain’d.
Then shouted loud Lycaon’s noble son:
“Arouse ye, valiant Trojans, ye who goad
Your flying steeds; the bravest of the Greeks
Is wounded, nor, I deem, can long withstand
My weapon, if indeed from Lycia’s shore
By Phoebus’ counsel sent I join’d the war.”

Thus he, vain-glorious; but not so was quell’d
The godlike chief; back he withdrew, and stood
Beside his car, and thus to Sthenelus,
The son of Capaneus, his speech address’d:
“Up, gentle son of Capaneus, descend
From off the car, and from my shoulder draw
This stinging arrow forth.” He said, and down
Leap’d from the chariot Sthenelus, and stood
Beside him; and as forth he drew the shaft,
Gush’d out the blood, and dyed the twisted mail.
Then thus the valiant son of Tydeus pray’d:
“Hear me, thou child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Unconquer’d! if amid the deadly fight
Thy friendly aid my father e’er sustain’d,
Let me in turn thy favour find; and grant
Within my reach and compass of my spear
That man may find himself, who unawares
Hath wounded me, and vainly boasting deems
I shall not long behold the light of day.”
Thus pray’d the chief, and Pallas heard his pray’r;
To all his limbs, to feet and hands alike,
She gave fresh vigour; and with winged words,
Beside him as she stood, address’d him thus:

“Go fearless onward, Diomed, to meet
The Trojan hosts; for I within thy breast
Thy father’s dauntless courage have infus’d,
Such as of old in Tydeus’ bosom dwelt,
Bold horseman, buckler-clad; and from thine eyes
The film that dimm’d them I have purg’d away,
That thou mayst well ’twixt Gods and men discern.
If then some God make trial of thy force,
With other of th’ Immortals fight thou not;
But should Jove’s daughter Venus dare the fray
Thou needst not shun at her to cast thy spear.”

This said, the blue-ey’d Goddess disappear’d.
Forthwith again amid the foremost ranks
Tydides mingled; keenly as before
His spirit against the Trojans burn’d to fight,
With threefold fury now he sought the fray.
As when a hungry lion has o’erleap’d
The sheepfold; him the guardian of the flock
Has wounded, not disabled; by his wound
To rage excited, but not forc’d to fly,
The fold he enters, scares the trembling sheep,
That, closely huddled, each on other press,
Then pounces on his prey, and leaps the fence:
So pounc’d Tydides on the Trojan host.
Astynous and Hypeiron then he slew,
His people’s guardian; through the breast of one
He drove his spear, and with his mighty sword
He smote the other on the collar-bone,
The shoulder sev’ring from the neck and back.
Them left he there to lie; of Abas then
And Polyeidus went in hot pursuit,
Sons of Eurydamas, an aged seer,
Whose visions stay’d them not; but both were doom’d
A prey to valiant Diomed to fall.
Xanthus and Thoon then the hero slew,
The sons of Phaenops, children of his age:
He, worn with years, no other sons begot,
Heirs of his wealth; they two together fell,
And to their father left a load of grief,
That from the battle they return’d not home,
And distant kindred all his substance shar’d.
On Chromius and Echemon next he fell,
Two sons of Priam on one chariot borne;
And as a lion springs upon a herd,
And breaks the neck of heifer or of steer,
Feeding in woodland glade; with such a spring
These two, in vain resisting, from their car
Tydides hurl’d; then stripp’d their arms, and bade
His followers lead their horses to the ships.

Him when Æneas saw amid the ranks
Dealing destruction, through the fight and throng
Of spears he plung’d, if haply he might find
The godlike Pandarus; Lycaon’s son
He found, of noble birth and stalwart form,
And stood before him, and address’d him thus:
“Where, Pandarus, are now thy winged shafts,
Thy bow, and well-known skill, wherein with thee
Can no man here contend? nor Lycia boasts,
Through all her wide-spread plains, a truer aim;
Then raise to Jove thy hands, and with thy shaft
Strike down this chief, whoe’er he be, that thus
Is making fearful havoc in our host,
Relaxing many a warrior’s limbs in death:
If he be not indeed a God, incens’d
Against the Trojans for neglected rites;
For fearful is the vengeance of a God.”

Whom answer’d thus Lycaon’s noble son:
“Æneas, chief and councillor of Troy,
Most like in all respects to Tydeus’ son
He seems; his shield I know, and visor’d helm,
And horses; whether he himself be God,
I cannot tell; but if he be indeed
The man I think him, Tydeus’ valiant son,
He fights not thus without the aid of Heav’n;
But by his side, his shoulders veiled in cloud,
Some God attends his steps, and turns away
The shaft that just hath reach’d him; for ev’n now
A shaft I shot, which by the breastplate’s joint
Pierc’d his right shoulder through: full sure I deem’d
That shaft had sent him to the shades, and yet
It slew him not; ’tis sure some angry God.
Nor horse have I, nor car on which to mount;
But in my sire Lycaon’s wealthy house
Elev’n fair chariots stand, all newly built,
Each with its cover; by the side of each
Two steeds on rye and barley white are fed;
And in his well-built house, when here I came,
Lycaon, aged warrior, urg’d me oft
With horses and with chariots high upborne,
To lead the Trojans in the stubborn fight;
I hearken’d not—’twere better if I had—
Yet fear’d I lest my horses, wont to feed
In plenty unstinted, by the soldiers’ wants
Might of their custom’d forage be depriv’d;
I left them there, and hither came on foot,
And trusting to my bow: vain trust, it seems;
Two chiefs already have I struck, the sons
Of Tydeus and of Atreus; with true aim
Drawn blood from both, yet but increas’d their rage.
Sad was the hour when down from where it hung
I took my bow, and hasting to the aid
Of godlike Hector, hither led my troops;
But should I e’er return, and see again
My native land, my wife, my lofty hall,
Then may a stranger’s sword cut off my head,
If with these hands I shatter not, and burn,
The bow that thus hath fail’d me at my need.”

Him answer’d thus Æneas, chief of Troy:
“Speak thou not thus; our fortunes shall not change
Till thou and I, with chariot and with horse,
This chief encounter, and his prowess prove;
Then mount my car, and see how swift my steeds.
Hither and thither, in pursuit or flight,
From those of Tros descended, scour the plain.
So if the victory to Diomed,
The son of Tydeus, should by Jove be giv’n,
We yet may safely reach the walls of Troy.
Take thou the whip and reins, while I descend
To fight on foot; or thou the chief engage,
And leave to me the conduct of the car.”

Whom answer’d thus Lycaon’s noble son:
“Æneas, of thy horses and thy car
Take thou the charge; beneath th’ accustomed hand,
With more assurance would they draw the car,
If we from Tydeus’ son be forced to fly;
Nor, struck with panic, and thy voice unheard,
Refuse to bear us from the battle-field;
So should ourselves be slain, and Tydeus’ son
In triumph drive thy horses to the ships.
But thou thy horses and thy chariot guide,
While I his onset with my lance receive.”

Thus saying, on the car they mounted both,
And tow’rd Tydides urg’d their eager steeds.
Them Sthenelus beheld, the noble son
Of Capaneus, and to Tydides cried:
“Oh son of Tydeus, dearest to my soul,
Two men I see, of might invincible,
Impatient to engage thee; Pandarus,
Well skill’d in archery, Lycaon’s son;
With him, Æneas, great Anchises’ son,
Who from immortal Venus boasts his birth.
Then let us timely to the car retreat,
Lest, moving thus amid the foremost ranks,
Thy daring pay the forfeit of thy life.”

To whom brave Diomed with stern regard:
“Talk not to me of flight! I heed thee not!
It is not in my nature so to fight
With skulking artifice and faint retreat;
My strength is yet unbroken; I should shame
To mount the car; but forward will I go
To meet these chiefs’ encounter; for my soul
Pallas forbids the touch of fear to know.
Nor shall their horses’ speed procure for both
A safe return, though one escape my arm.
This too I say, and bear my words in mind;
By Pallas’ counsel if my hap should be
To slay them both, leave thou my horses here,
The reins attaching to the chariot-rail,
And seize, and from the Trojans to the ships
Drive off the horses in Æneas’ car;
From those descended, which all-seeing Jove
On Tros, for Ganymede his son, bestow’d:
With these may none beneath the sun compare.
Anchises, King of men, the breed obtain’d
By cunning, to the horses sending mares
Without the knowledge of Laomedon.
Six colts were thus engender’d: four of these
In his own stalls he rear’d; the other two
Gave to Æneas, fear-inspiring chief:
These could we win, our praise were great indeed.”

Such converse while they held, the twain approach’d,
Their horses urg’d to speed; then thus began,
To Diomed, Lycaon’s noble son:

“Great son of Tydeus, warrior brave and skill’d,
My shaft, it seems, has fail’d to reach thy life;
Try we then now what hap attends my spear.”
He said; and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
And struck Tydides’ shield; right through the shield
Drove the keen weapon, and the breastplate reach’d.
Then shouted loud Lycaon’s noble son:
“Thou hast it through the flank, nor canst thou long
Survive the blow; great glory now is mine.”

To whom, unmov’d, the valiant Diomed:
“Thine aim hath failed, I am not touch’d; and now
I deem we part not hence till one of ye
Glut with his blood th’ insatiate Lord of War.”

He said: the spear, by Pallas guided, struck
Beside the nostril, underneath the eye;
Crash’d thro’ the teeth, and cutting thro’ the tongue
Beneath the angle of the jaw came forth:
Down from the car he fell; and loudly rang
His glitt’ring arms: aside the startled steeds
Sprang devious: from his limbs the spirit fled.
Down leap’d Æneas, spear and shield in hand,
Against the Greeks to guard the valiant dead;
And like a lion, fearless in his strength,
Around the corpse he stalk’d, this way and that,
His spear and buckler round before him held,
To all who dar’d approach him threat’ning death,
With fearful shouts; a rocky fragment then
Tydides lifted up, a mighty mass,
Which scarce two men could raise, as men are now:
But he, unaided, lifted it with ease.
With this he smote Æneas near the groin,
Where the thigh-bone, inserted in the hip,
Turns in the socket-joint; the rugged mass
The socket crush’d, and both the tendons broke,
And tore away the flesh: down on his knees,
Yet resting on his hand, the hero fell;
And o’er his eyes the shades of darkness spread.
Then had Æneas, King of men, been slain,
Had not his mother, Venus, child of Jove,
Who to Anchises, where he fed his flocks,
The hero bore, his peril quickly seen:
Around her son she threw her snowy arms,
And with a veil, thick-folded, wrapt him round,
From hostile spears to guard him, lest some Greek
Should pierce his breast, and rob him of his life.

She from the battle thus her son removed;
Nor did the son of Capaneus neglect
The strict injunction by Tydides giv’n;
His reins attaching to the chariot-rail,
Far from the battle-din he check’d, and left,
His own fleet steeds; then rushing forward, seiz’d,
And from the Trojans tow’rd the camp drove off,
The sleek-skinn’d horses of Æneas’ car.
These to Deipylus, his chosen friend,
He gave, of all his comrades best esteem’d,
Of soundest judgment, tow’rd the ships to drive.
Then, his own car remounting, seiz’d the reins,
And urg’d with eager haste his fiery steeds,
Seeking Tydides; he, meanwhile, press’d on
In keen pursuit of Venus; her he knew
A weak, unwarlike Goddess, not of those
That like Bellona fierce, or Pallas, range
Exulting through the blood-stain’d fields of war.

Her, searching thro’ the crowd, at length he found,
And springing forward, with his pointed spear
A wound inflicted on her tender hand.
Piercing th’ ambrosial veil, the Graces’ work,
The sharp spear graz’d her palm below the wrist.
Forth from the wound th’ immortal current flow’d,
Pure ichor, life-stream of the blessed Gods;
They eat no bread, they drink no ruddy wine,
And bloodless thence and deathless they become.
The Goddess shriek’d aloud, and dropp’d her son;
But in his arms Apollo bore him off
In a thick cloud envelop’d, lest some Greek
Might pierce his breast, and rob him of his life.
Loud shouted brave Tydides, as she fled:
“Daughter of Jove, from battle-fields retire;
Enough for thee weak woman to delude;
If war thou seek’st, the lesson thou shalt learn
Shall cause thee shudder but to hear it nam’d.”
Thus he; but ill at ease, and sorely pain’d,
The Goddess fled: her, Iris, swift as wind,
Caught up, and from the tumult bore away,
Weeping with pain, her fair skin soil’d with blood.

Mars on the left hand of the battle-field
She found, his spear reclining by his side,
And, veil’d in cloud, his car and flying steeds.
Kneeling, her brother she besought to lend
The flying steeds, with golden frontlets crown’d:
“Dear brother, aid me hence, and lend thy car
To bear me to Olympus, seat of Gods;
Great is the pain I suffer from a wound
Receiv’d from Diomed, a mortal man,
Who now would dare with Jove himself to fight.”

He lent the steeds, with golden frontlets crown’d;
In deep distress she mounted on the car:
Beside her Iris stood, and took the reins,
And urg’d the coursers; nothing loth they flew,
And soon to high Olympus, seat of Gods,
They came: swift Iris there the coursers stay’d,
Loos’d from the chariot, and before them plac’d
Ambrosial forage: on her mother’s lap,
Dione, Venus fell; she in her arms
Embrac’d, and sooth’d her with her hand, and said:
“Which of the heav’nly pow’rs hath wrong’d thee thus,
My child, as guilty of some open shame?”

Whom answer’d thus the laughter-loving Queen;
“The haughty son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Hath wounded me, because my dearest son,
Æneas, from the field I bore away.
No more ’twixt Greeks and Trojans is the fight,
But with the Gods themselves the Greeks contend.”
To whom Dione, heav’nly Goddess, thus:
“Have patience, dearest child; though much enforc’d,
Restrain thine anger: we, in Heav’n who dwell,
Have much to bear from mortals; and ourselves
Too oft upon each other suff’rings lay.
Mars had his suff’rings; by Aloeus’ sons,
Otus and Ephialtes, strongly bound,
He thirteen months in brazen fetters lay:
And there had pin’d away the God of War,
Insatiate Mars, had not their step-mother,
The beauteous Eriboea, sought the aid
Of Hermes; he by stealth releas’d the God,
Sore worn and wasted by his galling chains.
Juno too suffer’d, when Amphitryon’s son
Through her right breast a three-barb’d arrow sent:
Dire, and unheard of, were the pangs she bore.
Great Pluto’s self the stinging arrow felt,
When that same son of aegis-bearing Jove
Assail’d him in the very gates of hell,
And wrought him keenest anguish; pierc’d with pain
To high Olympus, to the courts of Jove,
Groaning, he came; the bitter shaft remain’d
Deep in his shoulder fix’d, and griev’d his soul.
But soon with soothing ointments Paeon’s hand
(For death on him was powerless) heal’d the wound.
Accurs’d was he, of daring over-bold,
Reckless of evil deeds, who with his bow
Assail’d the Gods, who on Olympus dwell.
The blue-ey’d Pallas, well I know, has urg’d
Tydides to assail thee; fool and blind!
Unknowing he how short his term of life
Who fights against the Gods! for him no child
Upon his knees shall lisp a father’s name,
Safe from the war and battle-field return’d.
Brave as he is, let Diomed beware
He meet not some more dangerous foe than thee.
Then fair Ægiale, Adrastus’ child,
The noble wife of valiant Diomed,
Shall long, with lamentations loud, disturb
The slumbers of her house, and vainly mourn
Her youthful Lord, the bravest of the Greeks.”
She said; and wip’d the ichor from the wound;
The hand was heal’d, the grievous pains allay’d.
But Juno and Minerva, looking on,
With words of bitter mock’ry Saturn’s son
Provok’d: and thus the blue-ey’d Goddess spoke:
“O Father! may I speak without offence?
Venus, it seems, has sought to lead astray
Some Grecian woman, and persuade to join
Those Trojans, whom she holds in high esteem;
And, as her hand the gentle dame caress’d,
A golden clasp has scratched her slender arm.”

Thus she: and smil’d the Sire of Gods and men;
He call’d the golden Venus to his side,
And, “Not to thee, my child,” he said, “belong
The deeds of war; do thou bestow thy care
On deeds of love, and tender marriage ties;
But leave to Mars and Pallas feats of arms.”

Such converse while they held, brave Diomed
Again assail’d Æneas; well he knew
Apollo’s guardian hand around him thrown;
Yet by the God undaunted, on he press’d
To slay Æneas, and his arms obtain.
Thrice was his onset made, with murd’rous aim;
And thrice Apollo struck his glitt’ring shield;
But when, with godlike force, he sought to make
His fourth attempt, the Far-destroyer spoke
In terms of awful menace: “Be advis’d,
Tydides, and retire; nor as a God
Esteem thyself; since not alike the race
Of Gods immortal and of earth-born men.”

He said; and Diomed a little space
Before the Far-destroyer’s wrath retir’d:
Apollo then Æneas bore away
Far from the tumult; and in Pergamus,
Where stood his sacred shrine, bestow’d him safe.
Latona there, and Dian, Archer-Queen,
In the great temple’s innermost recess,
Gave to his wounds their care, and sooth’d his pride.
Meanwhile Apollo of the silver bow
A phantom form prepar’d, the counterpart
Of great Æneas, and alike in arms:
Around the form, of Trojans and of Greeks,
Loud was the din of battle; fierce the strokes
That fell on rounded shield of tough bull’s-hide,
And lighter targe, before each warrior’s breast.
Then thus Apollo to the God of War:
“Mars! Mars! thou bane of mortals, blood-stain’d Lord,
Razer of cities, wer’t not well thyself
To interpose, and from the battle-field
Withdraw this chief, Tydides? such his pride,
He now would dare with Jove himself to fight.
Venus, of late, he wounded in the wrist;
And, like a God, but now confronted me.”
He said, and sat on Ilium’s topmost height:
While Mars, in likeness of the Thracian chief,
Swift Acamas, amid the Trojan ranks
Mov’d to and fro, and urg’d them to the fight.
To Priam’s Heav’n-descended sons he call’d;
“Ye sons of Priam, Heav’n-descended King,
How long will ye behold your people slain?
Till to your very doors the war be brought?
Æneas, noble-soul’d Anchises’ son,
In like esteem with Hector held, is down;
On to his aid! our gallant comrade save!”

He said; his words fresh courage gave to all:
Then thus Sarpedon, in reproachful tone,
Address’d the godlike Hector; “Where is now,
Hector, the spirit that heretofore was thine?
’Twas once thy boast that ev’n without allies
Thyself, thy brethren, and thy house, alone
The city could defend: for all of these
I look in vain, and see not one; they all,
As curs around a lion, cow’r and crouch:
We, strangers and allies, maintain the fight.
I to your aid, from lands afar remote,
From Lycia came, by Xanthus’ eddying stream;
There left a cherish’d wife, and infant son,
And rich possessions, which might envy move;
Yet I my troops encourage; and myself
Have play’d my part, though nought have I to lose,
Nought that the Greeks could drive or bear away;
But thou stand’st idly by; nor bidd’st the rest
Maintain their ground, and guard their wives and homes.
Beware lest ye, as in the meshes caught
Of some wide-sweeping net, become the prey
And booty of your foes, who soon shall lay
Your prosp’rous city level with the dust.
By day and night should this thy thoughts engage,
With constant pray’r to all thy brave allies,
Firmly to stand, and wipe this shame away.”

He said; and Hector felt the biting speech;
Down from his car he leap’d; and through the ranks,
Two jav’lins brandishing, he pass’d, to arms
Exciting all, and rais’d his battle-cry.
The tide was turn’d; again they fac’d the Greeks:
In serried ranks the Greeks, undaunted, stood.
As when the wind from off a threshing-floor,
Where men are winnowing, blows the chaff away;
When yellow Ceres with the breeze divides
The corn and chaff, which lies in whit’ning heaps;
So thick the Greeks were whiten’d o’er with dust,
Which to the brazen vault of Heav’n arose
Beneath the horses’ feet, that with the crowd
Were mingled, by their drivers turn’d to flight.
Unwearied still, they bore the brunt; but Mars
The Trojans succouring, the battle-field
Veil’d in thick clouds, from ev’ry quarter brought.
Thus he of Phoebus of the golden sword
Obey’d th’ injunction, bidding him arouse
The courage of the Trojans, when he saw
Pallas approaching to support the Greeks.

Then from the wealthy shrine Apollo’s self
Æneas brought, and vigour fresh infus’d:
Amid his comrades once again he stood;
They joy’d to see him yet alive, and sound,
And full of vigour; yet no question ask’d:
No time for question then, amid the toils
Impos’d by Phoebus of the silver bow,
And blood-stain’d Mars, and Discord unappeas’d.

Meanwhile Ulysses, and th’ Ajaces both,
And Diomed, with courage for the fight
The Grecian force inspir’d; they undismay’d
Shrank not before the Trojans’ rush and charge;
In masses firm they stood, as when the clouds
Are gather’d round the misty mountain top
By Saturn’s son, in breathless calm, while sleep
The force of Boreas and the stormy winds,
That with their breath the shadowy clouds disperse;
So stood the Greeks, nor shunn’d the Trojans’ charge.
Through all the army Agamemnon pass’d,
And cried, “Brave comrades, quit ye now like men;
Bear a stout heart; and in the stubborn fight,
Let each to other mutual succour give;
By mutual succour more are sav’d than fall;
In timid flight nor fame nor safety lies.”

Thus he: and straight his jav’lin threw, and struck
A man of mark, Æneas’ faithful friend,
Deicoon, the son of Pergasus,
By Troy, as ever foremost in the field,
In equal honour held with Priam’s sons.
His shield the monarch Agamemnon struck;
The shield’s defence was vain; the spear pass’d through
Beneath the belt, and in his groin was lodg’d;
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

On th’ other side, Æneas slew two chiefs,
The bravest of the Greeks, Orsilochus
And Crethon, sons of Diocles, who dwelt
In thriving Phera; rich in substance he,
And from the mighty River Alpheus trac’d
His high descent, who through the Pylian land
His copious waters pours; to him was born
Orsilochus, of num’rous tribes the chief;
To him succeeded valiant Diocles;
To whom were born twin sons, Orsilochus
And Crethon, skill’d in ev’ry point of war.
They, in the vigour of their youth, to Troy
Had sail’d amid the dark-ribb’d ships of Greece,
Of Atreus’ sons the quarrel to uphold;
But o’er them both the shades of death were spread.
As two young lions, by their tawny dam
Nurs’d in the mountain forest’s deep recess,
On flocks and herds their youthful fury pour,
With havoc to the sheepfolds, till themselves
Succumb, o’ermaster’d by the hand of man:
So fell these two beneath Æneas’ hand,
And like two lofty pines in death they lay.

The warlike Menelaus saw their fall
With pitying eye; and through the foremost ranks
With brandish’d spear advanc’d, by Mars impell’d,
Who hop’d his death by great Æneas’ hand.
Him Nestor’s son, Antilochus, beheld,
And hasten’d to his aid; for much he fear’d
Lest ill befall the monarch, and his death
Deprive them of their warlike labours’ fruit.
They two, with force combined of hand and spear,
Press’d onward to the fight; Antilochus
His station keeping close beside the King.
Before the two combined, Æneas fear’d,
Bold warrior as he was, to hold his ground.
The slain they drew within the Grecian lines,
Placed in their comrades’ hands, and turning back
Amid the foremost mingled in the fray.
Then, brave as Mars, Pylaemenes they slew,
The buckler’d Paphlagonians’ warlike chief;
Him Menelaus, hand to hand engag’d,
Pierc’d with a spear-thrust through the collar-bone;
While, with a pond’rous stone, Antilochus
Full on the elbow smote Atymnius’ son,
Mydon, his charioteer, in act to turn
His fiery steeds to flight; down from his hands
Fell to the ground the iv’ry-mounted reins.
On rush’d Antilochus, and with his sword
Across the temples smote him; gasping, he
Upon his neck and shoulders from the car
Pitch’d headlong; and (for there the sand was deep)
Awhile stood balanc’d, till the horses’ feet
Dash’d him upon the ground; Antilochus,
The horses seizing, drove them to the ships.

Hector beheld athwart the ranks, and rush’d,
Loud shouting, to th’ encounter; at his back
Follow’d the thronging bands of Troy, by Mars
And fierce Bellona led; she by the hand
Wild Uproar held; while Mars a giant spear
Brandish’d aloft: and stalking now before,
Now following after Hector, urg’d them on.
Quail’d at the sight the valiant Diomed:
As when a man, long journeying o’er the plain,
All unprepar’d, stands sudden on the brink
Of a swift stream, down rushing to the sea,
Boiling with foam, and back recoils; so then
Recoil’d Tydides, and address’d the crowd:
“O friends, we marvel at the might display’d
By Hector, spearman skill’d and warrior bold;
But still some guardian God his steps attends,
And shields from danger; now beside him stands,
In likeness of a mortal, Mars himself.
Then turning still your faces to your foes,
Retire, nor venture with the Gods to fight.”

He said; the Trojans now were close at hand,
And, mounted both upon a single car,
Two chiefs, Menesthes and Anchialus,
Well skill’d in war, by Hector’s hand were slain.

With pitying eyes great Ajax Telamon
Beheld their fall; advancing close, he threw
His glitt’ring spear; the son of Selagus
It struck, Amphius, who in Paesus dwelt,
In land and substance rich; by evil fate
Impell’d, to Priam’s house he brought his aid.
Below the belt the spear of Ajax struck,
And in his groin the point was buried deep;
Thund’ring he fell; then forward Ajax sprang
To seize the spoils of war; but fast and fierce
The Trojans show’r’d their weapons bright and keen,
And many a lance the mighty shield receiv’d.
Ajax, his foot firm planted on the slain,
Withdrew the brazen spear; yet could not strip
His armour off, so galling flew the shafts;
And much he fear’d his foes might hem him in,
Who closely press’d upon him, many and brave;
And, valiant as he was, and tall, and strong,
Still drove him backward; he perforce retired.

Thus labour’d they amid the stubborn fight.
Then evil fate induc’d Tlepolemus,
Valiant and strong, the son of Hercules,
Heav’n-born Sarpedon to confront in fight.
When near they came, of cloud-compelling Jove
Grandson and son, Tlepolemus began:
“Sarpedon, Lycian chief, what brings thee here,
Trembling and crouching, all unskill’d in war?
Falsely they speak who fable thee the son
Of aegis-bearing Jove; so far art thou
Beneath their mark who claim’d in elder days
That royal lineage: such my father was,
Of courage resolute, of lion heart.
With but six ships, and with a scanty band,
The horses by Laomedon withheld
Avenging, he o’erthrew this city, Troy,
And made her streets a desert; but thy soul
Is poor, thy troops are wasting fast away;
Nor deem I that the Trojans will in thee
(Ev’n were thy valour more) and Lycia’s aid
Their safeguard find; but vanquish’d by my hand,
This day the gates of Hades thou shalt pass.”

To whom the Lycian chief, Sarpedon, thus:
“Tlepolemus, the sacred walls of Troy
Thy sire o’erthrew, by folly of one man,
Laomedon, who with injurious words
His noble service recompens’d; nor gave
The promis’d steeds, for which he came from far.
For thee, I deem thou now shalt meet thy doom
Here, at my hand; on thee my spear shall win
Renown for me, thy soul to Hades send.”

Thus as Sarpedon spoke, Tlepolemus
Uprais’d his ashen spear; from both their hands
The pond’rous weapons simultaneous flew.
Full in the throat Tlepolemus receiv’d
Sarpedon’s spear; right through the neck it pass’d,
And o’er his eyes the shades of death were spread.
On th’ other side his spear Sarpedon struck
On the left thigh; the eager weapon pass’d
Right through the flesh, and in the bone was fix’d;
The stroke of death his father turn’d aside.
Sarpedon from the field his comrades bore,
Weigh’d down and tortured by the trailing spear,
For, in their haste to bear him to his car,
Not one bethought him from his thigh to draw
The weapon forth; so sorely were they press’d.

The Greeks too from the battle-field convey’d
The slain Tlepolemus; Ulysses saw,
Patient of spirit, but deeply mov’d at heart;
And with conflicting thoughts his breast was torn,
If first he should pursue the Thund’rer’s son,
Or deal destruction on the Lycian host.
But fate had not decreed the valiant son
Of Jove to fall beneath Ulysses’ hand;
So on the Lycians Pallas turn’d his wrath.
Alastor then, and Coeranus he slew,
Chromius, Alcander, Halius, Prytanis,
Noemon; nor had ended then the list
Of Lycian warriors by Ulysses slain;
But Hector of the glancing helm beheld;
Through the front ranks he rush’d, with burnish’d crest
Resplendent, flashing terror on the Greeks;
With joy Sarpedon saw his near approach,
And with imploring tones address’d him thus:

“Hector, thou son of Priam, leave me not
A victim to the Greeks, but lend thine aid:
Then in your city let me end my days.
For not to me is giv’n again to see
My native land; or, safe returning home,
To glad my sorrowing wife and infant child.”

Thus he; but Hector, answ’ring not a word,
Pass’d on in silence, hasting to pursue
The Greeks, and pour destruction on their host.

Beneath the oak of aegis-bearing Jove
His faithful comrades laid Sarpedon down,
And from his thigh the valiant Pelagon,
His lov’d companion, drew the ashen spear.
He swoon’d, and giddy mists o’erspread his eyes:
But soon reviv’d, as on his forehead blew,
While yet he gasp’d for breath, the cooling breeze.

By Mars and Hector of the brazen helm
The Greeks hard-press’d, yet fled not to their ships,
Nor yet sustain’d the fight; but back retir’d
Soon as they learned the presence of the God.
Say then who first, who last, the prowess felt
Of Hector, Priam’s son, and mail-clad Mars?
The godlike Teuthras first, Orestes next,
Bold charioteer; th’ Ætolian spearman skill’d,
Trechus, Œnomaus, and Helenus,
The son of Œnops; and Oresbius, girt
With sparkling girdle; he in Hyla dwelt,
The careful Lord of boundless wealth, beside
Cephisus’ marshy banks; Bœotia’s chiefs
Around him dwelt, on fat and fertile soil.
Juno, the white-arm’d Queen, who saw these two
The Greeks destroying in the stubborn fight,
To Pallas thus her winged words address’d:
“O Heav’n! brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Vain was our word to Menelaus giv’n.
That he the well-built walls of Troy should raze,
And safe return, if unrestrain’d we leave
Ferocious Mars to urge his mad career.
Come then; let us too mingle in the fray.”

She said: and Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, complied.
Offspring of Saturn, Juno, heav’nly Queen,
Herself th’ immortal steeds caparison’d,
Adorn’d with golden frontlets: to the car
Hebe the circling wheels of brass attach’d,
Eight-spok’d, that on an iron axle turn’d;
The felloes were of gold, and fitted round
With brazen tires, a marvel to behold;
The naves were silver, rounded every way:
The chariot-board on gold and silver bands
Was hung, and round it ran a double rail:
The pole was all of silver; at the end
A golden yoke, with golden yoke-bands fair:
And Juno, all on fire to join the fray,
Beneath the yoke the flying coursers led.

Pallas, the child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Within her father’s threshold dropp’d her veil,
Of airy texture, work of her own hands;
The cuirass donn’d of cloud-compelling Jove,
And stood accoutred for the bloody fray.
Her tassell’d aegis round her shoulders next
She threw, with Terror circled all around;
And on its face were figur’d deeds of arms,
And Strife, and Courage high, and panic Rout;
There too a Gorgon’s head, of monstrous size,
Frown’d terrible, portent of angry Jove:
And on her head a golden helm she plac’d,
Four-crested, double-peak’d, whose ample verge
A hundred cities’ champions might suffice:
Her fiery car she mounted: in her hand
A spear she bore, long, weighty, tough; wherewith
The mighty daughter of a mighty sire
Sweeps down the ranks of those her hate pursues.

Then Juno sharply touch’d the flying steeds:
Forthwith spontaneous opening, grated harsh
The heavenly portals, guarded by the Hours,
Who Heav’n and high Olympus have in charge
To roll aside, or draw the veil of cloud.
Through these th’ excited horses held their way.
They found the son of Saturn, from the Gods
Sitting apart, upon the highest crest
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; there arriv’d,
The white-arm’d Goddess Juno stay’d her steeds,
And thus address’d the Sov’reign Lord of Heav’n:

“O Father Jove! canst thou behold unmov’d
The violence of Mars? how many Greeks,
Reckless and uncontroll’d, he hath destroy’d;
To me a source of bitter grief; meanwhile
Venus and Phoebus of the silver bow
Look on, well pleas’d, who sent this madman forth,
To whom both law and justice are unknown.
Say, Father Jove, shall I thine anger move,
If with disgrace I drive him from the field?”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Go, send against him Pallas; she, I know,
Hath oft inflicted on him grievous pain.”.

He said: the white-arm’d Queen with joy obey’d;
She urg’d her horses; nothing loth, they flew
Midway between the earth, and starry Heav’n:
Far as his sight extends, who from on high
Looks from his watch-tow’r o’er the dark-blue sea,
So far at once the neighing horses bound.
But when to Troy they came, beside the streams
Where Simois’ and Scamander’s waters meet,
The white-arm’d Goddess stay’d her flying steeds,
Loos’d from the car, and veil’d in densest cloud.
For them, at bidding of the river-God,
Ambrosial forage grew: the Goddesses,
Swift as the wild wood-pigeon’s rapid flight,
Sped to the battle-field to aid the Greeks.
But when they reach’d the thickest of the fray,
Where throng’d around the might of Diomed
The bravest and the best, as lions fierce,
Or forest-boars, the mightiest of their kind,
There stood the white-arm’d Queen, and call’d aloud,
In form of Stentor, of the brazen voice,
Whose shout was as the shout of fifty men:

“Shame on ye, Greeks, base cowards! brave alone
In outward semblance; while Achilles yet
Went forth to battle, from the Dardan gates
The Trojans never ventur’d to advance,
So dreaded they his pond’rous spear; but now
Far from the walls, beside your ships, they fight.”

She said: her words their drooping courage rous’d.
Meanwhile the blue-ey’d Pallas went in haste
In search of Tydeus’ son; beside his car
She found the King, in act to cool the wound
Inflicted by the shaft of Pandarus:
Beneath his shield’s broad belt the clogging sweat
Oppress’d him, and his arm was faint with toil;
The belt was lifted up, and from the wound
He wip’d the clotted blood: beside the car
The Goddess stood, and touch’d the yoke, and said:

“Little like Tydeus’ self is Tydeus’ son:
Low was his stature, but his spirit was high:
And ev’n when I from combat rashly wag’d
Would fain have kept him back, what time in Thebes
He found himself, an envoy and alone,
Without support, among the Thebans all,
I counsell’d him in peace to share the feast:
But by his own impetuous courage led,
He challenged all the Thebans to contend
With him in wrestling, and o’erthrew them all
With ease; so mighty was the aid I gave.
Thee now I stand beside, and guard from harm,
And bid thee boldly with the Trojans fight.
But, if the labours of the battle-field
O’ertask thy limbs, or heartless fear restrain,
No issue thou of valiant Tydeus’ loins.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“I know thee, Goddess, who thou art; the child
Of aegis-bearing Jove: to thee my mind
I freely speak, nor aught will I conceal.
Nor heartless fear, nor hesitating doubt,
Restrain me; but I bear thy words in mind,
With other of th’ Immortals not to fight:
But should Jove’s daughter, Venus, dare the fray,
At her I need not shun to throw my spear.
Therefore I thus withdrew, and others too
Exhorted to retire, since Mars himself
I saw careering o’er the battle-field.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus:
“Thou son of Tydeus, dearest to my soul,
Fear now no more with Mars himself to fight,
Nor other God; such aid will I bestow.
Come then; at him the first direct thy car;
Encounter with him hand to hand; nor fear
To strike this madman, this incarnate curse,
This shameless renegade; who late agreed
With Juno and with me to combat Troy,
And aid the Grecian cause; who now appears,
The Greeks deserting, in the Trojan ranks.”

Thus Pallas spoke, and stretching forth her hand
Backward his comrade Sthenelus she drew
From off the chariot; down in haste he sprang.
His place beside the valiant Diomed
The eager Goddess took; beneath the weight
Loud groan’d the oaken axle; for the car
A mighty Goddess and a Hero bore.
Then Pallas took the whip and reins, and urg’d
Direct at Mars the fiery coursers’ speed.

The bravest of th’ Ætolians, Periphas,
Ochesius’ stalwart son, he just had slain,
And stood in act to strip him of his arms.
The helmet then of Darkness Pallas donn’d,
To hide her presence from the sight of Mars:
But when the blood-stain’d God of War beheld
Advancing tow’rd him godlike Diomed,
The corpse of stalwart Periphas he left,
There where he fell, to lie; while he himself
Of valiant Diomed th’ encounter met.
When near they came, first Mars his pond’rous spear
Advanc’d beyond the yoke and horses’ reins,
With murd’rous aim; but Pallas from the car
Turn’d it aside, and foil’d the vain attempt.

Then Diomed thrust forward in his turn
His pond’rous spear; low on the flank of Mars,
Guided by Pallas, with successful aim,
Just where the belt was girt, the weapon struck:
It pierc’d the flesh, and straight was back withdrawn:
Then Mars cried out aloud, with such a shout
As if nine thousand or ten thousand men
Should simultaneous raise their battle-cry:
Trojans and Greeks alike in terror heard,
Trembling; so fearful was the cry of Mars.
As black with clouds appears the darken’d air,
When after heat the blust’ring winds arise,
So Mars to valiant Diomed appear’d,
As in thick clouds he took his heav’nward flight.
With speed he came to great Olympus’ heights,
Th’ abode of Gods; and sitting by the throne
Of Saturn’s son, with anguish torn, he show’d
Th’ immortal stream that trickled from the wound,
And thus to Jove his piteous words address’d:

“O Father Jove, canst thou behold unmov’d
These acts of violence? the greatest ills
We Gods endure, we each to other owe
Who still in human quarrels interpose.
Of thee we all complain; thy senseless child
Is ever on some evil deed intent.
The other Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
Are all to thee obedient and submiss;
But thy pernicious daughter, nor by word
Nor deed dost thou restrain; who now excites
Th’ o’erbearing son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Upon th’ immortal Gods to vent his rage.
Venus of late he wounded in the wrist,
And, as a God, but now encounter’d me:
Barely I ’scap’d by swiftness of my feet;
Else, ’mid a ghastly heap of corpses slain,
In anguish had I lain; and, if alive,
Yet liv’d disabl’d by his weapon’s stroke.”

Whom answer’d thus the Cloud-compeller, Jove,
With look indignant: “Come no more to me,
Thou wav’ring turncoat, with thy whining pray’rs:
Of all the Gods who on Olympus dwell
I hate thee most; for thou delight’st in nought
But strife and war; thou hast inherited
Thy mother, Juno’s, proud, unbending mood,
Whom I can scarce control; and thou, methinks,
To her suggestions ow’st thy present plight.
Yet since thou art my offspring, and to me
Thy mother bore thee, I must not permit
That thou should’st long be doom’d to suffer pain;
But had thy birth been other than it is,
For thy misdoings thou hadst long ere now
Been banish’d from the Gods’ companionship.”

He said: and straight to Paeon gave command
To heal the wound; with soothing anodynes
He heal’d it quickly; soon as liquid milk
Is curdled by the fig-tree’s juice, and turns
In whirling flakes, so soon was heal’d the wound.
By Hebe bath’d, and rob’d afresh, he sat
In health and strength restor’d, by Saturn’s son.

Mars thus arrested in his murd’rous course,
Together to th’ abode of Jove return’d
The Queen of Argos and the blue-ey’d Maid.



ARGUMENT.

THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.


The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the
chief augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to
appoint a solemn procession of the Queen and the Trojan matrons to the
temple of Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The
battle relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have
an interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge of
the friendship and hospitality past between their ancestors, they make
exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus,
prevailed upon Paris to return to the battle, and taken a tender leave
of his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.

The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois
and Scamander, and then changes to Troy.

BOOK VI.

The Gods had left the field, and o’er the plain
Hither and thither surg’d the tide of war,
As couch’d th’ opposing chiefs their brass-tipp’d spears,
Midway ’twixt Simois’ and Scamander’s streams.

First through the Trojan phalanx broke his way
The son of Telamon, the prop of Greece,
The mighty Ajax; on his friends the light
Of triumph shedding, as Eusorus’ son
He smote, the noblest of the Thracian bands,
Valiant and strong, the gallant Acamas.
Full in the front, beneath the plumed helm,
The sharp spear struck, and crashing thro’ the bone,
The warrior’s eyes were clos’d in endless night.

Next valiant Diomed Axylus slew,
The son of Teuthranes, who had his home
In fair Arisba; rich in substance he,
And lov’d of all; for, dwelling near the road,
He op’d to all his hospitable gate;
But none of all he entertain’d was there
To ward aside the bitter doom of death:
There fell they both, he and his charioteer,
Calesius, who athwart the battle-field
His chariot drove; one fate o’ertook them both.

Then Dresus and Opheltius of their arms
Euryalus despoil’d; his hot pursuit
Æsepus next, and Pedasus assail’d,
Brothers, whom Abarbarea, Naiad nymph,
To bold Bucolion bore; Bucolion, son
Of great Laomedon, his eldest born,
Though bastard: he upon the mountain side,
On which his flocks he tended, met the nymph,
And of their secret loves twin sons were born;
Whom now at once Euryalus of strength
And life depriv’d, and of their armour stripp’d.

By Polypoetes’ hand, in battle strong,
Was slain Astyalus; Pidutes fell,
Chief of Percote, by Ulysses’ spear;
And Teucer godlike Aretaon slew.
Antilochus, the son of Nestor, smote
With gleaming lance Ablerus; Elatus
By Agamemnon, King of men, was slain,
Who dwelt by Satnois’ widely-flowing stream,
Upon the lofty heights of Pedasus.
By Leitus was Phylacus in flight
O’erta’en; Eurypylus Melanthius slew.

Then Menelaus, good in battle, took
Adrastus captive; for his horses, scar’d
And rushing wildly o’er the plain, amid
The tangled tamarisk scrub his chariot broke,
Snapping the pole; they with the flying crowd
Held city-ward their course; he from the car
Hurl’d headlong, prostrate lay beside the wheel,
Prone on his face in dust; and at his side,
Poising his mighty spear, Atrides stood.
Adrastus clasp’d his knees, and suppliant cried,
“Spare me, great son of Atreus! for my life
Accept a price; my wealthy father’s house
A goodly store contains of brass, and gold,
And well-wrought iron; and of these he fain
Would pay a noble ransom, could he hear
That in the Grecian ships I yet surviv’d.”

His words to pity mov’d the victor’s breast;
Then had he bade his followers to the ships
The captive bear; but running up in haste.
Fierce Agamemnon cried in stern rebuke;

“Soft-hearted Menelaus, why of life
So tender? Hath thy house receiv’d indeed
Nothing but benefits at Trojan hands?
Of that abhorred race, let not a man
Escape the deadly vengeance of our arms;
No, not the infant in its mother’s womb;
No, nor the fugitive; but be they all,
They and their city, utterly destroy’d,
Uncar’d for, and from mem’ry blotted out.”

Thus as he spoke, his counsel, fraught with death,
His brother’s purpose chang’d; he with his hand
Adrastus thrust aside, whom with his lance
Fierce Agamemnon through the loins transfix’d;
And, as he roll’d in death, upon his breast
Planting his foot, the ashen spear withdrew.

Then loudly Nestor shouted to the Greeks:
“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars!
Loiter not now behind, to throw yourselves
Upon the prey, and bear it to the ships;
Let all your aim be now to kill; anon
Ye may at leisure spoil your slaughter’d foes.”

With words like these he fir’d the blood of all.
Now had the Trojans by the warlike Greeks
In coward flight within their walls been driv’n;
But to Æneas and to Hector thus
The son of Priam, Helenus, the best
Of all the Trojan seers, address’d his speech:
“Æneas, and thou Hector, since on you,
Of all the Trojans and the Lycian hosts,
Is laid the heaviest burthen, for that ye
Excel alike in council and in fight,
Stand here awhile, and moving to and fro
On ev’ry side, around the gates exhort
The troops to rally, lest they fall disgrac’d,
Flying for safety to their women’s arms,
And foes, exulting, triumph in their shame.
Their courage thus restor’d, worn as we are,
We with the Greeks will still maintain the fight,
For so, perforce, we must; but, Hector, thou
Haste to the city; there our mother find,
Both thine and mine; on Ilium’s topmost height
By all the aged dames accompanied,
Bid her the shrine of blue-ey’d Pallas seek;
Unlock the sacred gates; and on the knees
Of fair-hair’d Pallas place the fairest robe
In all the house, the amplest, best esteem’d;
And at her altar vow to sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine that never felt the goad,
So she have pity on the Trojan state,
Our wives, and helpless babes, and turn away
The fiery son of Tydeus, spearman fierce,
The Minister of Terror; bravest he,
In my esteem, of all the Grecian chiefs:
For not Achilles’ self, the prince of men,
Though Goddess-born, such dread inspir’d; so fierce
His rage; and with his prowess none may vie.”

He said, nor uncomplying, Hector heard
His brother’s counsel; from his car he leap’d
In arms upon the plain; and brandish’d high
His jav’lins keen, and moving to and fro
The troops encourag’d, and restor’d the fight.
Rallying they turn’d, and fac’d again the Greeks:
These ceas’d from slaughter, and in turn gave way,
Deeming that from the starry Heav’n some God
Had to the rescue come; so fierce they turn’d.
Then to the Trojans Hector call’d aloud:

“Ye valiant Trojans, and renown’d Allies,
Quit you like men; remember now, brave friends,
Your wonted valour; I to Ilium go
To bid our wives and rev’rend Elders raise
To Heav’n their pray’rs, with vows of hecatombs.”

Thus saying, Hector of the glancing helm
Turn’d to depart; and as he mov’d along,
The black bull’s-hide his neck and ancles smote,
The outer circle of his bossy shield.

Then Tydeus’ son, and Glaucus, in the midst,
Son of Hippolochus, stood forth to fight;
But when they near were met, to Glaucus first
The valiant Diomed his speech address’d:
“Who art thou, boldest man of mortal birth?
For in the glorious conflict heretofore
I ne’er have seen thee; but in daring now
Thou far surpassest all, who hast not fear’d
To face my spear; of most unhappy sires
The children they, who my encounter meet.
But if from Heav’n thou com’st, and art indeed
A God, I fight not with the heav’nly powers.
Not long did Dryas’ son, Lycurgus brave,
Survive, who dar’d th’ Immortals to defy:
He, ’mid their frantic orgies, in the groves
Of lovely Nyssa, put to shameful rout
The youthful Bacchus’ nurses; they, in fear,
Dropp’d each her thyrsus, scatter’d by the hand
Of fierce Lycurgus, with an ox-goad arm’d.
Bacchus himself beneath the ocean wave
In terror plung’d, and, trembling, refuge found
In Thetis’ bosom from a mortal’s threats:
The Gods indignant saw, and Saturn’s son
Smote him with blindness; nor surviv’d he long,
Hated alike by all th’ immortal Gods.
I dare not then the blessed Gods oppose;
But be thou mortal, and the fruits of earth
Thy food, approach, and quickly meet thy doom.”

To whom the noble Glaucus thus replied:
“Great son of Tydeus, why my race enquire?
The race of man is as the race of leaves:
Of leaves, one generation by the wind
Is scattered on the earth; another soon
In spring’s luxuriant verdure bursts to light.
So with our race; these flourish, those decay.
But if thou wouldst in truth enquire and learn
The race I spring from, not unknown of men;
There is a city, in the deep recess
Of pastoral Argos, Ephyre by name:
There Sisyphus of old his dwelling had,
Of mortal men the craftiest; Sisyphus,
The son of Æolus; to him was born
Glaucus; and Glaucus in his turn begot
Bellerophon, on whom the Gods bestow’d
The gifts of beauty and of manly grace.
But Proetus sought his death; and, mightier far,
From all the coasts of Argos drove him forth,
To Proetus subjected by Jove’s decree.
For him the monarch’s wife, Antaea, nurs’d
A madd’ning passion, and to guilty love
Would fain have tempted him; but fail’d to move
The upright soul of chaste Bellerophon.
With lying words she then address’d the King:
‘Die, Proetus, thou, or slay Bellerophon,
Who basely sought my honour to assail.’
The King with anger listen’d to her words;
Slay him he would not; that his soul abhorr’d;
But to the father of his wife, the King
Of Lycia, sent him forth, with tokens charg’d
Of dire import, on folded tablets trac’d,
Pois’ning the monarch’s mind, to work his death.
To Lycia, guarded by the Gods, he went;
But when he came to Lycia, and the streams
Of Xanthus, there with hospitable rites
The King of wide-spread Lycia welcom’d him.
Nine days he feasted him, nine oxen slew;
But with the tenth return of rosy morn
He question’d him, and for the tokens ask’d
He from his son-in-law, from Proetus, bore.
The tokens’ fatal import understood,
He bade him first the dread Chimaera slay;
A monster, sent from Heav’n, not human born,
With head of lion, and a serpent’s tail,
And body of a goat; and from her mouth
There issued flames of fiercely-burning fire:
Yet her, confiding in the Gods, he slew.
Next, with the valiant Solymi he fought,
The fiercest fight that e’er he undertook.
Thirdly, the women-warriors he o’erthrew,
The Amazons; from whom returning home,
The King another stratagem devis’d;
For, choosing out the best of Lycia’s sons,
He set an ambush; they return’d not home,
For all by brave Bellerophon were slain.
But, by his valour when the King perceiv’d
His heav’nly birth, he entertain’d him well;
Gave him his daughter; and with her the half
Of all his royal honours he bestow’d:
A portion too the Lycians meted out,
Fertile in corn and wine, of all the state
The choicest land, to be his heritage.
Three children there to brave Bellerophon
Were born; Isander, and Hippolochus,
Laodamia last, belov’d of Jove,
The Lord of counsel; and to him she bore
Godlike Sarpedon of the brazen helm.
Bellerophon at length the wrath incurr’d
Of all the Gods; and to th’ Aleian plain
Alone he wander’d; there he wore away
His soul, and shunn’d the busy haunts of men.
Insatiate Mars his son Isander slew
In battle with the valiant Solymi:
His daughter perish’d by Diana’s wrath.
I from Hippolochus my birth derive:
To Troy he sent me, and enjoin’d me oft
To aim at highest honours, and surpass
My comrades all; nor on my father’s name
Discredit bring, who held the foremost place
In Ephyre, and Lycia’s wide domain.
Such is my race, and such the blood I boast.”

He said; and Diomed rejoicing heard:
His spear he planted in the fruitful ground,
And thus with friendly words the chief address’d:

“By ancient ties of friendship are we bound;
For godlike Œneus in his house receiv’d
For twenty days the brave Bellerophon;
They many a gift of friendship interchang’d;
A belt, with crimson glowing, Œneus gave;
Bellerophon a double cup of gold,
Which in my house I left when here I came.
Of Tydeus no remembrance I retain;
For yet a child he left me, when he fell
With his Achaians at the gate of Thebes.
So I in Argos am thy friendly host;
Thou mine in Lycia, when I thither come:
Then shun we, e’en amid the thickest fight,
Each other’s lance; enough there are for me
Of Trojans and their brave allies to kill,
As Heav’n may aid me, and my speed of foot;
And Greeks enough there are for thee to slay,
If so indeed thou canst; but let us now
Our armour interchange, that these may know
What friendly bonds of old our houses join.”
Thus as they spoke, they quitted each his car;
Clasp’d hand in hand, and plighted mutual faith.
Then Glaucus of his judgment Jove depriv’d,
His armour interchanging, gold for brass,
A hundred oxen’s worth for that of nine.

Meanwhile, when Hector reach’d the oak beside
The Scaean gate, around him throng’d the wives
Of Troy, and daughters, anxious to enquire
The fate of children, brothers, husbands, friends;
He to the Gods exhorted all to pray,
For deep the sorrows that o’er many hung.
But when to Priam’s splendid house he came,
With polish’d corridors adorn’d—within
Were fifty chambers, all of polish’d stone,
Plac’d each by other; there the fifty sons
Of Priam with their wedded wives repos’d;
On th’ other side, within the court were built
Twelve chambers, near the roof, of polish’d stone,
Plac’d each by other; there the sons-in-law
Of Priam with their spouses chaste repos’d;
To meet him there his tender mother came,
And with her led the young Laodice,
Fairest of all her daughters; clasping then
His hands, she thus address’d him: “Why, my son,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle-field?
Are Trojans by those hateful sons of Greece,
Fighting around the city, sorely press’d?
And com’st thou, by thy spirit mov’d, to raise,
On Ilium’s heights, thy hands in pray’r to Jove?
But tarry till I bring the luscious wine,
That first to Jove, and to th’ Immortals all,
Thou mayst thine off’ring pour; then with the draught
Thyself thou mayst refresh; for great the strength
Which gen’rous wine imparts to men who toil,
As thou hast toil’d, thy comrades to protect.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“No, not for me, mine honour’d mother, pour
The luscious wine, lest thou unnerve my limbs,
And make me all my wonted prowess lose.
The ruddy wine I dare not pour to Jove
With hands unwash’d; nor to the cloud-girt son
Of Saturn may the voice of pray’r ascend
From one with blood bespatter’d and defil’d.
Thou, with the elder women, seek the shrine
Of Pallas; bring your gifts; and on the knees
Of fair-hair’d Pallas place the fairest robe
In all the house, the amplest, best esteem’d;
And at her altar vow to sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine, that never felt the goad;
So she have pity on the Trojan state,
Our wives, and helpless babes; and turn away
The fiery son of Tydeus, spearman fierce,
The Minister of Terror; to the shrine
Of Pallas thou; to Paris I, to call
If haply he will hear; would that the earth
Would gape and swallow him! for great the curse
That Jove thro’ him hath brought on men of Troy,
On noble Priam, and on Priam’s sons.
Could I but know that he were in his grave,
Methinks my sorrows I could half forget.”

He said: she, to the house returning, sent
Th’ attendants through the city, to collect
The train of aged suppliants; she meanwhile
Her fragrant chamber sought, wherein were stor’d
Rich garments by Sidonian women work’d,
Whom godlike Paris had from Sidon brought,
Sailing the broad sea o’er, the selfsame path
By which the high-born Helen he convey’d.
Of these, the richest in embroidery,
The amplest, and the brightest, as a star
Refulgent, plac’d with care beneath the rest,
The Queen her off’ring bore to Pallas’ shrine:
She went, and with her many an ancient dame.
But when the shrine they reach’d on Ilium’s height,
Theano, fair of face, the gates unlock’d,
Daughter of Cisseus, sage Antenor’s wife,
By Trojans nam’d at Pallas’ shrine to serve.
They with deep moans to Pallas rais’d their hands;
But fair Theano took the robe, and plac’d
On Pallas’ knees, and to the heav’nly Maid,
Daughter of Jove, she thus address’d her pray’r:
“Guardian of cities, Pallas, awful Queen,
Goddess of Goddesses, break thou the spear
Of Tydeus’ son; and grant that he himself
Prostrate before the Scaean gates may fall;
So at thine altar will we sacrifice
Twelve yearling kine, that never felt the goad,
If thou have pity on the state of Troy,
The wives of Trojans, and their helpless babes.”

Thus she; but Pallas answer’d not her pray’r.
While thus they call’d upon the heav’nly Maid,
Hector to Paris’ mansion bent his way;
A noble structure, which himself had built
Aided by all the best artificers
Who in the fertile realm of Troy were known;
With chambers, hall, and court, on Ilium’s height,
Near to where Priam’s self and Hector dwelt.
There enter’d Hector, well belov’d of Jove;
And in his hand his pond’rous spear he bore,
Twelve cubits long; bright flash’d the weapon’s point
Of polish’d brass, with circling hoop of gold.
There in his chamber found he whom he sought,
About his armour busied, polishing
His shield, his breastplate, and his bended bow.
While Argive Helen, ’mid her maidens plac’d,
The skilful labours of their hands o’erlook’d.
To him thus Hector with reproachful words;
“Thou dost not well thine anger to indulge;
In battle round the city’s lofty wall
The people fast are falling; thou the cause
That fiercely thus around the city burns
The flame of war and battle; and thyself
Wouldst others blame, who from the fight should shrink.
Up, ere the town be wrapp’d in hostile fires.”

To whom in answer godlike Paris thus:
“Hector, I own not causeless thy rebuke;
Yet will I speak; hear thou and understand;
’Twas less from anger with the Trojan host,
And fierce resentment, that I here remain’d,
Than that I sought my sorrow to indulge;
Yet hath my wife, e’en now, with soothing words
Urg’d me to join the battle; so, I own,
’Twere best; and Vict’ry changes oft her side.
Then stay, while I my armour don; or thou
Go first: I, following, will o’ertake thee soon.”

He said: but Hector of the glancing helm
Made answer none; then thus with gentle tones
Helen accosted him: “Dear brother mine,
(Of me, degraded, sorrow-bringing, vile!)
Oh that the day my mother gave me birth
Some storm had on the mountains cast me forth!
Or that the many-dashing ocean’s waves
Had swept me off, ere all this woe were wrought!
Yet if these evils were of Heav’n ordain’d,
Would that a better man had call’d me wife;
A sounder judge of honour and disgrace:
For he, thou know’st, no firmness hath of mind,
Nor ever will; a want he well may rue.
But come thou in, and rest thee here awhile,
Dear brother, on this couch; for travail sore
Encompasseth thy soul, by me impos’d,
Degraded as I am, and Paris’ guilt;
On whom this burthen Heav’n hath laid, that shame
On both our names through years to come shall rest.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Though kind thy wish, yet, Helen, ask me not
To sit or rest; I cannot yield to thee:
For to the succour of our friends I haste,
Who feel my loss, and sorely need my aid.
But thou thy husband rouse, and let him speed,
That he may find me still within the walls.
For I too homeward go; to see once more
My household, and my wife, and infant child:
For whether I may e’er again return,
I know not, or if Heav’n have so decreed,
That I this day by Grecian hands should fall.”

Thus saying, Hector of the glancing helm
Turn’d to depart; with rapid step he reach’d
His own well-furnished house, but found not there
His white-arm’d spouse, the fair Andromache.
She with her infant child and maid the while
Was standing, bath’d in tears, in bitter grief,
On Ilium’s topmost tower: but when her Lord
Found not within the house his peerless wife,
Upon the threshold pausing, thus he spoke:
“Tell me, my maidens, tell me true, which way
Your mistress went, the fair Andromache;
Or to my sisters, or my brothers’ wives?
Or to the temple where the fair-hair’d dames
Of Troy invoke Minerva’s awful name?”

To whom the matron of his house replied:
“Hector, if truly we must answer thee,
Not to thy sisters, nor thy brothers’ wives,
Nor to the temple where the fair-hair’d dames
Of Troy invoke Minerva’s awful name,
But to the height of Ilium’s topmost tow’r
Andromache is gone; since tidings came
The Trojan force was overmatch’d, and great
The Grecian strength; whereat, like one distract,
She hurried to the walls, and with her took,
Borne in the nurse’s arms, her infant child.”

So spoke the ancient dame; and Hector straight
Through the wide streets his rapid steps retrac’d.
But when at last the mighty city’s length
Was travers’d, and the Scaean gates were reach’d,
Whence was the outlet to the plain, in haste
Running to meet him came his priceless wife,
Eetion’s daughter, fair Andromache;
Eetion, who from Thebes Cilicia sway’d,
Thebes, at the foot of Placos’ wooded heights.
His child to Hector of the brazen helm
Was giv’n in marriage: she it was who now
Met him, and by her side the nurse, who bore,
Clasp’d to her breast, his all unconscious child,
Hector’s lov’d infant, fair as morning star;
Whom Hector call’d Scamandrius, but the rest
Astyanax, in honour of his sire,
The matchless chief, the only prop of Troy.
Silent he smil’d as on his boy he gaz’d:
But at his side Andromache, in tears,
Hung on his arm, and thus the chief address’d:

“Dear Lord, thy dauntless spirit will work thy doom:
Nor hast thou pity on this thy helpless child,
Or me forlorn, to be thy widow soon:
For thee will all the Greeks with force combin’d
Assail and slay: for me, ’twere better far,
Of thee bereft, to lie beneath the sod;
Nor comfort shall be mine, if thou be lost,
But endless grief; to me nor sire is left,
Nor honour’d mother; fell Achilles’ hand
My sire Eetion slew, what time his arms
The populous city of Cilicia raz’d,
The lofty-gated Thebes; he slew indeed,
But stripp’d him not; he reverenc’d the dead;
And o’er his body, with his armour burnt,
A mound erected; and the mountain nymphs,
The progeny of aegis-bearing Jove,
Planted around his tomb a grove of elms.
There were sev’n brethren in my father’s house;
All in one day they fell, amid their herds
And fleecy flocks, by fierce Achilles’ hand.
My mother, Queen of Placos’ wooded height,
Brought with the captives here, he soon releas’d
For costly ransom; but by Dian’s shafts
She, in her father’s house, was stricken down.
But, Hector, thou to me art all in one,
Sire, mother, brethren! thou, my wedded love!
Then pitying us, within the tow’r remain,
Nor make thy child an orphan, and thy wife
A hapless widow; by the fig-tree here
Array thy troops; for here the city wall,
Easiest of access, most invites assault.
Thrice have their boldest chiefs this point assail’d,
The two Ajaces, brave Idomeneus,
Th’ Atridae both, and Tydeus’ warlike son,
Or by the prompting of some Heav’n-taught seer,
Or by their own advent’rous courage led.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm;
“Think not, dear wife, that by such thoughts as these
My heart has ne’er been wrung; but I should blush
To face the men and long-rob’d dames of Troy,
If, like a coward, I could shun the fight.
Nor could my soul the lessons of my youth
So far forget, whose boast it still has been
In the fore-front of battle to be found,
Charg’d with my father’s glory and mine own.
Yet in my inmost soul too well I know,
The day must come when this our sacred Troy,
And Priam’s race, and Priam’s royal self
Shall in one common ruin be o’erthrown.
But not the thoughts of Troy’s impending fate,
Nor Hecuba’s nor royal Priam’s woes,
Nor loss of brethren, numerous and brave,
By hostile hands laid prostrate in the dust,
So deeply wring my heart as thoughts of thee,
Thy days of freedom lost, and led away
A weeping captive by some brass-clad Greek;
Haply in Argos, at a mistress’ beck,
Condemn’d to ply the loom, or water draw
From Hypereia’s or Messeis’ fount,
Heart-wrung, by stern necessity constrain’d.
Then they who see thy tears perchance may say,
‘Lo! this was Hector’s wife, who, when they fought
On plains of Troy, was Ilium’s bravest chief.’
Thus may they speak; and thus thy grief renew
For loss of him, who might have been thy shield
To rescue thee from slav’ry’s bitter hour.
Oh may I sleep in dust, ere be condemn’d
To hear thy cries, and see thee dragg’d away!”

Thus as he spoke, great Hector stretch’d his arms
To take his child; but back the infant shrank,
Crying, and sought his nurse’s shelt’ring breast,
Scar’d by the brazen helm and horse-hair plume,
That nodded, fearful, on the warrior’s crest.
Laugh’d the fond parents both, and from his brow
Hector the casque remov’d, and set it down,
All glitt’ring, on the ground; then kiss’d his child,
And danc’d him in his arms; then thus to Jove
And to th’ Immortals all address’d his pray’r:
“Grant, Jove, and all ye Gods, that this my son
May be, as I, the foremost man of Troy,
For valour fam’d, his country’s guardian King;
That men may say, ‘This youth surpasses far
His father,’ when they see him from the fight,
From slaughter’d foes, with bloody spoils of war
Returning, to rejoice his mother’s heart!”

Thus saying, in his mother’s arms he plac’d
His child; she to her fragrant bosom clasp’d,
Smiling through tears; with eyes of pitying love
Hector beheld, and press’d her hand, and thus
Address’d her—“Dearest, wring not thus my heart!
For till my day of destiny is come,
No man may take my life; and when it comes,
Nor brave nor coward can escape that day.
But go thou home, and ply thy household cares,
The loom, and distaff, and appoint thy maids
Their sev’ral tasks; and leave to men of Troy
And, chief of all to me, the toils of war.”

Great Hector said, and rais’d his plumed helm;
And homeward, slow, with oft-reverted eyes,
Shedding hot tears, his sorrowing wife return’d.
Arriv’d at valiant Hector’s well-built house,
Her maidens press’d around her; and in all
Arose at once the sympathetic grief.
For Hector, yet alive, his household mourn’d,
Deeming he never would again return,
Safe from the fight, by Grecian hands unharm’d.

Nor linger’d Paris in his lofty halls;
But donn’d his armour, glitt’ring o’er with brass,
And through the city pass’d with bounding steps.
As some proud steed, at well-fill’d manger fed,
His halter broken, neighing, scours the plain,
And revels in the widely-flowing stream
To bathe his sides; then tossing high his head,
While o’er his shoulders streams his ample mane.
Light borne on active limbs, in conscious pride.
To the wide pastures of the mares he flies;
So Paris, Priam’s son, from Ilium’s height,
His bright arms flashing like the gorgeous sun,
Hasten’d, with boastful mien, and rapid step.
Hector he found, as from the spot he turn’d
Where with his wife he late had converse held;
Whom thus the godlike Paris first address’d:
“Too long, good brother, art then here detain’d,
Impatient for the fight, by my delay;
Nor have I timely, as thou bad’st me, come.”
To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm:
“My gallant brother, none who thinks aright
Can cavil at thy prowess in the field;
For thou art very valiant; but thy will
Is weak and sluggish; and it grieves my heart,
When from the Trojans, who in thy behalf
Such labours undergo, I hear thy name
Coupled with foul reproach! But go we now!
Henceforth shall all be well, if Jove permit
That from our shores we drive th’ invading Greeks,
And to the ever-living Gods of Heav’n
In peaceful homes our free libations pour.”



ARGUMENT.

THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.


The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector,
Minerva is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her
descend from Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put
off the general engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge
the Greeks to a single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the
challenge, the lot is cast, and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after
several attacks, are parted by the night. The Trojans calling a
council, Antenor proposes the delivery of Helen to the Greeks, to which
Paris will not consent, but offers to restore them her riches. Priam
sends a herald to make this offer, and to demand a truce for burning
the dead, the last of which only is agreed to by Agamemnon. When the
funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the advice of Nestor,
erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp, flanked with
towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune testifies his
jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from Jupiter. Both
armies pass the night in feasting, but Jupiter disheartens the Trojans
with thunder and other signs of his wrath.

The three-and-twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax; the
next day the truce is agreed: another is taken up in the funeral rites
of the slain; and one more in building the fortification before the
ships; so that somewhat above three days is employed in this book. The
scene lies wholly in the field.

BOOK VII.

Thus as he spoke, from out the city gates
The noble Hector pass’d, and by his side
His brother Paris; in the breast of both
Burnt the fierce ardour of the battle-field.
As when some God a fav’ring breeze bestows
On seamen tugging at the well-worn oar,
Faint with excess of toil, ev’n so appear’d
Those brethren twain to Troy’s o’erlabour’d host.

Then to their prowess fell, by Paris’ hand
Menesthius, royal Areithous’ son,
Whom to the King, in Arna, where he dwelt,
The stag-ey’d dame Phylomedusa bore;
While Hector smote, with well-directed spear,
Beneath the brass-bound headpiece, through the throat,
Eioneus, and slack’d his limbs in death;
And Glaucus, leader of the Lycian bands,
Son of Hippolochus, amid the fray
Iphinous, son of Dexias, borne on high
By two fleet mares upon a lofty car,
Pierc’d through the shoulder; from the car he fell
Prone to the earth, his limbs relax’d in death.
But them when Pallas saw, amid the fray
Dealing destruction on the hosts of Greece,
From high Olympus to the walls of Troy
She came in haste; Apollo there she found,
As down he look’d from Ilium’s topmost tow’r,
Devising vict’ry to the arms of Troy.
Beside the oak they met; Apollo first,
The son of Jove, the colloquy began:
“Daughter of Jove, from great Olympus’ heights,
Why com’st thou here, by angry passion led?
Wouldst thou the vict’ry, swaying here and there,
Give to the Greeks? since pitiless thou see’st
The Trojans slaughter’d? Be advis’d by me,
For so ’twere better; cause we for today
The rage of battle and of war to cease;
To-morrow morn shall see the fight renew’d,
Until the close of Ilium’s destiny;
For so ye Goddesses have wrought your will,
That this fair city should in ruin fall.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“So be it, Archer-King; with like intent
I from Olympus came; but say, what means
Wilt thou devise to bid the conflict cease?”

To whom Apollo, royal son of Jove:
“The might of valiant Hector let us move
To challenge to the combat, man to man,
Some Grecian warrior; while the brass-clad Greeks
Their champion urge the challenge to accept,
And godlike Hector meet in single fight.”

He said; nor did Minerva not assent;
But Helenus, the son of Priam, knew
The secret counsel by the Gods devis’d;
And drawing near to Hector, thus he spoke:
“Hector, thou son of Priam, sage as Jove
In council, hearken to a brother’s words.
Bid that the Greeks and Trojans all sit down,
And thou defy the boldest of the Greeks
With thee in single combat to contend;
By revelation from th’ eternal Gods,
I know that here thou shalt not meet thy fate.”

He said, and Hector joy’d to hear his words;
Forth in the midst he stepp’d, and with his spear
Grasp’d in the middle, stay’d the Trojan ranks.
With one accord they sat; on th’ other side
Atrides bade the well-greav’d Greeks sit down;
While, in the likeness of two vultures, sat
On the tall oak of aegis-bearing Jove,
Pallas, and Phoebus of the silver bow,
With heroes’ deeds delighted; dense around
Bristled the ranks, with shield, and helm, and spear.
As when the west wind freshly blows, and brings
A dark’ning ripple o’er the ocean waves,
E’en so appear’d upon the plain the ranks
Of Greeks and Trojans; standing in the midst,
Thus to both armies noble Hector spoke:
“Hear, all ye Trojans, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
It hath not pleas’d high-thron’d Saturnian Jove
To ratify our truce, who both afflicts
With labours hard, till either ye shall take
Our well-fenc’d city, or yourselves to us
Succumb beside your ocean-going ships.
Here have ye all the chiefest men of Greece;
Of all, let him who dares with me to fight,
Stand forth, and godlike Hector’s might confront.
And this I say, and call to witness Jove,
If with the sharp-edg’d spear he vanquish me,
He shall strip off, and to the hollow ships
In triumph bear my armour; but my corpse
Restore, that so the men and wives of Troy
May deck with honours due my funeral pyre.
But, by Apollo’s grace should I prevail,
I will his arms strip off and bear to Troy,
And in Apollo’s temple hang on high;
But to the ships his corpse I will restore,
That so the long-hair’d Greeks with solemn rites
May bury him, and to his mem’ry raise
By the broad Hellespont a lofty tomb;
And men in days to come shall say, who urge
Their full-oar’d bark across the dark-blue sea,
‘Lo there a warrior’s tomb of days gone by,
A mighty chief, whom glorious Hector slew:’
Thus shall they say, and thus my fame shall live.”

Thus Hector spoke; they all in silence heard,
Sham’d to refuse, but fearful to accept.
At length in anger Menelaus rose,
Groaning in spirit, and with bitter words
Reproach’d them: “Shame, ye braggart cowards, shame!
Women of Greece! I cannot call you men!
’Twere foul disgrace indeed, and scorn on scorn,
If Hector’s challenge none of all the Greeks
Should dare accept; to dust and water turn
All ye who here inglorious, heartless sit!
I will myself confront him; for success,
Th’ immortal Gods above the issues hold.”

Thus as he spoke, he donn’d his dazzling arms.
Then, Menelaus, had thine end approach’d
By Hector’s hands, so much the stronger he,
Had not the Kings withheld thee and restrain’d.
Great Agamemnon’s self, wide-ruling King,
Seizing his hand, address’d him thus by name:
“What! Heav’n-born Menelaus, art thou mad?
Beseems thee not such folly; curb thy wrath,
Though vex’d; nor think with Hector to contend,
Thy better far, inspiring dread in all.
From his encounter in the glorious fight,
Superior far to thee, Achilles shrinks;
But thou amid thy comrades’ ranks retire;
Some other champion will the Greeks provide;
And, fearless as he is, and of the fight
Insatiate, yet will Hector, should he ’scape
Unwounded from the deadly battle-strife,
Be fain, methinks, to rest his weary limbs.”

He said, and with judicious counsel sway’d
His brother’s mind; he yielded to his words,
And gladly his attendants doff’d his arms.

Then Nestor rose, and thus address’d the Greeks:
“Alas, alas! what shame is this for Greece!
What grief would fill the aged Peleus’ soul,
Sage chief in council, of the Myrmidons
Leader approv’d, who often in his house
Would question me, and lov’d from me to hear
Of all the Greeks the race and pedigree,
Could he but learn how Hector cow’d them all!
He to the Gods with hands uprais’d would pray
His soul might from his body be divorc’d,
And sink beneath the earth! Oh would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, such were now
My vig’rous youth, as when beside the banks
Of swiftly-flowing Celadon, the men
Of Pylos with th’ Arcadian spearmen fought,
By Pheia’s walls, around Iardan’s streams.
Then from the ranks, in likeness as a God,
Advanc’d their champion, Ereuthalion bold.
The arms of Areithous he wore:
Of godlike Areithous, whom men
And richly-girdled women had surnam’d
The Macebearer; for not with sword or bow
He went to fight, but with an iron mace
Broke through the squadrons: him Lycurgus slew,
By stealth, not brav’ry, in a narrow way,
Where nought avail’d his iron mace from death
To save him; for Lycurgus, with his spear,
Preventing, thrust him through the midst; he fell
Prostrate; and from his breast the victor stripp’d
His armour off, the gift of brass-clad Mars;
And in the tug of war he wore it oft;
But when Lycurgus felt th’ approach of age,
He to his faithful follower and friend,
To Ereuthalion gave it; therewith, arm’d,
He now to combat challeng’d all the chiefs.
None dar’d accept, for fear had fallen on all;
Then I with dauntless spirit his might oppos’d,
The youngest of them all; with him I fought,
And Pallas gave the vict’ry to my arm.
Him there I slew, the tallest, strongest man;
For many another there beside him lay.
Would that my youth and strength were now the same;
Then soon should Hector of the glancing helm
A willing champion find; but ye, of Greece
The foremost men, with Hector fear to fight.”

The old man spoke reproachful; at his words
Up rose nine warriors: far before the rest,
The monarch Agamemnon, King of men;
Next Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed;
The two Ajaces, cloth’d with courage high;
Idomeneus, and of Idomeneus
The faithful follower, brave Meriones,
Equal in fight to blood-stain’d Mars; with these
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son;
Thoas, Andraemon’s son; Ulysses last:
These all with Hector offer’d to contend.
Then thus again Gerenian Nestor spoke:
“Shake then the lots; on whomsoe’er it fall,
Great profit shall he bring to Grecian arms,
Great glory to himself, if he escape
Unwounded from the deadly battle strife.”
He said: each mark’d his sev’ral lot, and all
Together threw in Agamemnon’s helm.
The crowd, with hands uplifted, pray’d the Gods,
And looking heav’nward, said, “Grant, Father Jove,
The lot on Ajax, or on Tydeus’ son,
Or on Mycenæ’s wealthy King may fall.”

Thus they: then aged Nestor shook the helm,
And forth, according to their wish, was thrown
The lot of Ajax; then from left to right
A herald show’d to all the chiefs of Greece,
In turn, the token; they who knew it not,
Disclaim’d it all; but when to him he came
Who mark’d, and threw it in Atrides’ helm,
The noble Ajax, and, approaching, placed
The token in his outstretch’d hand, forthwith
He knew it, and rejoic’d; before his feet
He threw it down upon the ground, and said,
“O friends, the lot is mine; great is my joy,
And hope o’er godlike Hector to prevail.
But now, while I my warlike armour don,
Pray ye to Saturn’s royal son, apart,
In silence, that the Trojans hear ye not;
Or ev’n aloud, for nought have we to fear.
No man against my will can make me fly,
By greater force or skill; nor will, I hope,
My inexperience in the field disgrace
The teaching of my native Salamis.”

Thus he; and they to Saturn’s royal son
Address’d their pray’rs, and looking heav’nward, said:
“O Father Jove, who rul’st on Ida’s height!
Most great! most glorious! grant that Ajax now
May gain the vict’ry, and immortal praise:
Or if thy love and pity Hector claim,
Give equal pow’r and equal praise to both.”

Ajax meanwhile in dazzling brass was clad;
And when his armour all was duly donn’d,
Forward he mov’d, as when gigantic Mars
Leads nations forth to war, whom Saturn’s son
In life-destroying conflict hath involv’d;
So mov’d the giant Ajax, prop of Greece,
With sternly smiling mien; with haughty stride
He trod the plain, and pois’d his pond’rous spear.
The Greeks, rejoicing, on their champion gaz’d,
The Trojans’ limbs beneath them shook with fear;
Ev’n Hector’s heart beat quicker in his breast;
Yet quail he must not now, nor back retreat
Amid his comrades—he, the challenger!
Ajax approach’d; before him, as a tow’r
His mighty shield he bore, sev’n-fold, brass-bound,
The work of Tychius, best artificer
That wrought in leather; he in Hyla dwelt.
Of sev’n-fold hides the pond’rous shield was wrought
Of lusty bulls; the eighth was glitt’ring brass.
This by the son of Telamon was borne
Before his breast; to Hector close he came,
And thus with words of haughty menace spoke:

“Hector, I now shall teach thee, man to man,
The mettle of the chiefs we yet possess,
Although Achilles of the lion heart,
Mighty in battle, be not with us still;
He by his ocean-going ships indeed
Against Atrides nurses still his wrath;
Yet are there those who dare encounter thee,
And not a few; then now begin the fight.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Ajax, brave leader, son of Telamon,
Deal not with me as with a feeble child,
Or woman, ign’rant of the ways of war;
Of war and carnage every point I know;
And well I know to wield, now right, now left,
The tough bull’s-hide that forms my stubborn targe:
Well know I too my fiery steeds to urge,
And raise the war-cry in the standing fight.
But not in secret ambush would I watch,
To strike, by stealth, a noble foe like thee;
But slay thee, if I may, in open fight.”

He said; and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear;
The brazen cov’ring of the shield it struck,
The outward fold, the eighth, above the sev’n
Of tough bull’s-hide; through six it drove its way
With stubborn force; but in the seventh was stay’d,
Then Ajax hurl’d in turn his pond’rous spear,
And struck the circle true of Hector’s shield;
Right thro’ the glitt’ring shield the stout spear pass’d,
And thro’ the well-wrought breastplate drove its way;
And, underneath, the linen vest it tore;
But Hector, stooping, shunn’d the stroke of death.
Withdrawing then their weapons, each on each
They fell, like lions fierce, or tusked boars,
In strength the mightiest of the forest beasts.
Then Hector fairly on the centre struck
The stubborn shield; yet drove not through the spear;
For the stout brass the blunted point repell’d.
But Ajax, with a forward bound, the shield
Of Hector pierc’d; right through the weapon pass’d;
Arrested with rude shock the warrior’s course,
And graz’d his neck, that spouted forth the blood.
Yet did not Hector of the glancing helm
Flinch from the contest: stooping to the ground,
With his broad hand a pond’rous stone he seiz’d,
That lay upon the plain, dark, jagg’d, and huge,
And hurl’d against the sev’n-fold shield, and struck
Full on the central boss; loud rang the brass:
Then Ajax rais’d a weightier mass of rock
And sent it whirling, giving to his arm
Unmeasur’d impulse; with a millstone’s weight
It crush’d the buckler; Hector’s knees gave way;
Backward he stagger’d, yet upon his shield
Sustain’d, till Phoebus rais’d him to his feet.
Now had they hand to hand with swords engag’d,
Had not the messengers of Gods and men,
The heralds, interpos’d; the one for Troy,
The other umpire for the brass-clad Greeks,
Talthybius and Idaeus, well approv’d.
Between the chiefs they held their wands, and thus
Idaeus both with prudent speech address’d:
“No more, brave youths! no longer wage the fight:
To cloud-compelling Jove ye both are dear,
Both valiant spearmen; that, we all have seen.
Night is at hand; behoves us yield to night.”

Whom answer’d thus the son of Telamon:
“Idaeus, bid that Hector speak those words:
He challeng’d all our chiefs; let him begin:
If he be willing, I shall not refuse.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Ajax, since God hath giv’n thee size, and strength,
And skill; and with the spear, of all the Greeks
None is thine equal; cease we for to-day
The fight; hereafter we may meet, and Heav’n
Decide our cause, and one with vict’ry crown.
Night is at hand; behoves us yield to night.
So by the ships shalt thou rejoice the Greeks,
And most of all, thy comrades and thy friends;
And so shall I, in Priam’s royal town,
Rejoice the men of Troy, and long-rob’d dames,
Who shall with grateful pray’rs the temples throng.
But make we now an interchange of gifts,
That both the Trojans and the Greeks may say,
‘On mortal quarrel did those warriors meet,
Yet parted thence in friendly bonds conjoin’d.’”

This said, a silver-studded sword he gave,
With scabbard and with well-cut belt complete;
Ajax a girdle, rich with crimson dye.
They parted; Ajax to the Grecian camp,
And Hector to the ranks of Troy return’d:
Great was the joy when him they saw approach,
Alive and safe; escap’d from Ajax’ might
And arm invincible; and tow’rd the town
They led him back, beyond their hope preserv’d;
While to Atrides’ tent the well-greav’d Greeks
Led Ajax, glorying in his triumph gain’d.

But when to Agamemnon’s tents they came,
The King of men to Saturn’s royal son
A bullock slew, a male of five years old;
The carcase then they flay’d; and cutting up,
Sever’d the joints; then fixing on the spits,
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
Their labours ended, and the feast prepar’d,
They shar’d the social meal, nor lack’d there aught.
To Ajax then the chine’s continuous length,
As honour’s meed, the mighty monarch gave.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
The aged Nestor first his mind disclos’d;
He who, before, the sagest counsel gave,
Now thus with prudent speech began, and said:
“Atrides, and ye other chiefs of Greece,
Since many a long-hair’d Greek hath fall’n in fight,
Whose blood, beside Scamander’s flowing stream,
Fierce Mars has shed, while to the viewless shades
Their spirits are gone, behoves thee with the morn
The warfare of the Greeks to intermit:
Then we, with oxen and with mules, the dead
From all the plain will draw; and, from the ships
A little space remov’d, will burn with fire:
That we, returning to our native land,
May to their children bear our comrades’ bones.
Then will we go, and on the plain erect
Around the pyre one common mound for all;
Then quickly build before it lofty tow’rs
To screen both ships and men; and in the tow’rs
Make ample portals, with well-fitting gates,
That through the midst a carriage-way may pass:
And a deep trench around it dig, to guard
Both men and chariots, lest on our defence
The haughty Trojans should too hardly press.”

He said; and all the Kings his words approv’d.
Meanwhile, on Ilium’s height, at Priam’s gate
The Trojan chiefs a troubled council held;
Which op’ning, thus the sage Antenor spoke:
“Hear now, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
Back to the sons of Atreus let us give
The Argive Helen, and the goods she brought;
For now in breach of plighted faith we fight:
Nor can I hope, unless to my advice
Ye listen, that success will crown our arms.”
Thus having said, he sat; and next arose
The godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord;
Who thus with winged words the chiefs address’d:
“Hostile to me, Antenor, is thy speech;
Thy better judgment better counsel knows;
But if in earnest such is thine advice,
Thee of thy senses have the Gods bereft.
Now, Trojans, hear my answer; I reject
The counsel, nor the woman will restore;
But for the goods, whate’er I hither brought
To Troy from Argos, I am well content
To give them all, and others add beside.”

This said, he sat; and aged Priam next,
A God in council, Dardan’s son, arose,
Who thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Hear now, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul:
Now through the city take your wonted meal;
Look to your watch, let each man keep his guard:
To-morrow shall Idaeus to the ships
Of Greece, to both the sons of Atreus, bear
The words of Paris, cause of all this war;
And ask besides, if from the deadly strife
Such truce they will accord us as may serve
To burn the dead; hereafter we may fight
Till Heav’n decide, and one with vict’ry crown.”

He said; and they, obedient to his word,
Throughout the ranks prepar’d the wonted meal:
But with the morning to the ships of Greece
Idaeus took his way: in council there
By Agamemnon’s leading ship he found
The Grecian chiefs, the ministers of Mars:
And ’mid them all the clear-voic’d herald spoke:

“Ye sons of Atreus, and ye chiefs of Greece,
From Priam, and the gallant sons of Troy,
I come, to bear, if ye be pleas’d to hear,
The words of Paris, cause of all this war:
The goods which hither in his hollow ships
(Would he had perish’d rather!) Paris brought,
He will restore, and others add beside;
But further says, the virgin-wedded wife
Of Menelaus, though the gen’ral voice
Of Troy should bid him. he will not restore:
Then bids me ask, if from the deadly strife
Such truce ye will accord us as may serve
To burn the dead: hereafter we may fight
Till Heav’n decide, and one with vict’ry crown.”

Thus he: they all in silence heard; at length
Uprose the valiant Diomed, and said;
“Let none from Paris now propose to accept
Or goods, or Helen’s self; a child may see
That now the doom of Troy is close at hand.”
He said; the sons of Greece, with loud applause,
The speech of valiant Diomed confirm’d.

Then to Idaeus Agamemnon thus:
“Idaeus, thou hast heard what answer give
The chiefs of Greece—their answer I approve.
But for the truce, for burial of the dead,
I nought demur; no shame it is to grace
With fun’ral rites the corpse of slaughter’d foes.
Be witness, Jove! and guard the plighted truce.”

He said: and heav’nward rais’d his staff; and back
To Ilium’s walls Idaeus took his way.
Trojans and Dardans there in council met
Expecting sat, till from the Grecian camp
Idaeus should return; he came, and stood
In mid assembly, and his message gave:
Then all in haste their sev’ral ways dispers’d,
For fuel some, and some to bring the dead.
The Greeks too from their well-mann’d ships went forth,
For fuel some, and some to bring the dead.
The sun was newly glancing on the earth.
From out the ocean’s smoothly-flowing depths
Climbing the Heav’ns, when on the plain they met.
Hard was it then to recognize the dead;
But when the gory dust was wash’d away,
Shedding hot tears, they plac’d them on the wains.
Nor loud lament, by Priam’s high command,
Was heard; in silence they, with grief suppress’d,
Heap’d up their dead upon the fun’ral pyre;
Then burnt with fire, and back return’d to Troy.
The well-greav’d Greeks, they too, with grief suppress’d,
Heap’d up their dead upon the fun’ral pyre;
Then burnt with fire, and to the ships return’d.

But ere ’twas morn, while daylight strove with night,
About the pyre a chosen band of Greeks
Had kept their vigil, and around it rais’d
Upon the plain one common mound for all;
And built in front a wall, with lofty tow’rs
To screen both ships and men; and in the tow’rs
Made ample portals with well-fitting gates,
That through the midst a carriage-way might pass:
Then dug a trench around it, deep and wide,
And in the trench a palisade they fix’d.

Thus labour’d thro’ the night the long-hair’d Greeks:
The Gods, assembled in the courts of Jove,
With wonder view’d the mighty work; and thus
Neptune, Earth-shaking King, his speech began:
“O Father Jove, in all the wide-spread earth
Shall men be found, in counsel and design
To rival us Immortals? see’st thou not
How round their ships the long-hair’d Greeks have built
A lofty wall, and dug a trench around,
Nor to the Gods have paid their off’rings due!
Wide as the light extends shall be the fame
Of this great work, and men shall lightly deem
Of that which I and Phoebus jointly rais’d,
With toil and pain, for great Laomedon.”

To whom in wrath the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Neptune, Earth-shaking King, what words are these?
This bold design to others of the Gods,
Of feebler hands, and pow’r less great than thine,
Might cause alarm; but, far as light extends,
Of this great work to thee shall be the fame:
When with their ships the long-hair’d Greeks shall take
Their homeward voyage to their native land,
This wall shall by the waves be broken through,
And sink, a shapeless ruin, in the sea:
O’er the wide shore again thy sands shall spread,
And all the boasted work of Greece o’erwhelm.”

Amid themselves such converse held the Gods.
The sun was set; the Grecian work was done;
They slew, and shar’d, by tents, the ev’ning meal.
From Lemnos’ isle a num’rous fleet had come
Freighted with wine; and by Euneus sent,
Whom fair Hypsipyle to Jason bore.
For Atreus’ sons, apart from all the rest,
Of wine, the son of Jason had despatch’d
A thousand measures; all the other Greeks
Hasten’d to purchase, some with brass, and some
With gleaming iron; other some with hides,
Cattle, or slaves; and joyous wax’d the feast.
All night the long-hair’d Greeks their revels held,
And so in Troy, the Trojans and Allies:
But through the night his anger Jove express’d
With awful thunderings; pale they turn’d with fear:
To earth the wine was from the goblets shed,
Nor dar’d they drink, until libations due
Had first been pour’d to Saturn’s mighty son.

Then lay they down, and sought the boon of sleep.



ARGUMENT.

THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.


Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the
pains of Tartarus, if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of
him that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels. The armies join
battle; Jupiter on Mount Ida weighs in his balances the fates of both,
and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings. Nestor alone
continues in the field in great danger; Diomed relieves him; whose
exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described. Juno
endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in
vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by Hector, and
carried off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are
restrained by Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to the
battle. Hector continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to
their fortifications before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the
watch all night in the camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and
escaping by flight. They kindle fires through all the field, and pass
the night under arms.

The time of seven-and-twenty days is employed from the opening of the
poem to the end of this book. The scene here (except of the celestial
machines) lies in the field toward the sea-shore.

BOOK VIII.

Now morn, in saffron robe, the earth o’erspread;
And Jove, the lightning’s Lord, of all the Gods
A council held upon the highest peak
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; he himself
Address’d them; they his speech attentive heard.

“Hear, all ye Gods, and all ye Goddesses,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
Let none among you, male or female, dare
To thwart my counsels: rather all concur,
That so these matters I may soon conclude.
If, from the rest apart, one God I find
Presuming or to Trojans or to Greeks
To give his aid, with ignominious stripes
Back to Olympus shall that God be driv’n;
Or to the gloom of Tartarus profound,
Far off, the lowest abyss beneath the earth,
With, gates of iron, and with floor of brass,
Beneath the shades as far as earth from Heav’n,
There will I hurl him, and ye all shall know
In strength how greatly I surpass you all.
Make trial if ye will, that all may know.
A golden cord let down from Heav’n, and all,
Both Gods and Goddesses, your strength, apply:
Yet would ye fail to drag from Heav’n to earth,
Strive as ye may, your mighty master, Jove;
But if I choose to make my pow’r be known,
The earth itself, and ocean, I could raise,
And binding round Olympus’ ridge the cord,
Leave them suspended so in middle air:
So far supreme my pow’r o’er Gods and men.”

He said, and they, confounded by his words,
In silence sat; so sternly did he speak.
At length the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, said:
“O Father, Son of Saturn, King of Kings,
Well do we know thy pow’r invincible;
Yet deeply grieve we for the warlike Greeks,
Condemn’d to hopeless ruin; from the fight,
Since such is thy command, we stand aloof;
But yet some saving counsel may we give,
Lest in thine anger thou destroy them quite.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller, smiling, thus:
“Be of good cheer, my child; unwillingly
I speak, yet will not thwart thee of thy wish.”

He said, and straight the brazen-footed steeds,
Of swiftest flight, with manes of flowing gold,
He harness’d to his chariot; all in gold
Himself array’d, the golden lash he grasp’d,
Of curious work; and mounting on his car,
Urg’d the fleet coursers; nothing loth, they flew
Midway betwixt the earth and starry heav’n.
To Ida’s spring-abounding hill he came,
And to the crest of Gargarus, wild nurse
Of mountain beasts; a sacred plot was there,
Whereon his incense-honour’d altar stood:
There stay’d his steeds the Sire of Gods and men
Loos’d from the car, and veil’d with clouds around.
Then on the topmost ridge he sat, in pride
Of conscious strength; and looking down, survey’d
The Trojan city, and the ships of Greece.

Meantime, the Greeks throughout their tents in haste
Despatch’d their meal, and arm’d them for the fight;
On th’ other side the Trojans donn’d their arms,
In numbers fewer, but with stern resolve,
By hard necessity constrain’d, to strive,
For wives and children, in the stubborn fight.
The gates all open’d wide, forth pour’d the crowd
Of horse and foot; and loud the clamour rose.
When in the midst they met, together rush’d
Bucklers and lances, and the furious might
Of mail-clad warriors; bossy shield on shield
Clatter’d in conflict; loud the clamour rose:
Then rose too mingled shouts and groans of men
Slaying and slain; the earth ran red with blood.
While yet ’twas morn, and wax’d the youthful day,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when the sun had reach’d
The middle Heav’n, th’ Eternal Father hung
His golden scales aloft, and plac’d in each
The fatal death-lot: for the sons of Troy
The one, the other for the brass-clad Greeks;
Then held them by the midst; down sank the lot
Of Greece, down to the ground, while high aloft
Mounted the Trojan scale, and rose to Heav’n.[2]
Then loud he bade the volleying thunder peal
From Ida’s heights; and ’mid the Grecian ranks
He hurl’d his flashing lightning; at the sight
Amaz’d they stood, and pale with terror shook.

Then not Idomeneus, nor Atreus’ son,
The mighty Agamemnon, kept their ground,
Nor either Ajax, ministers of Mars;
Gerenian Nestor, aged prop of Greece,
Alone remain’d, and he against his will,
His horse sore wounded by an arrow shot
By godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord:
Just on the crown, where close behind the head
First springs the mane, the deadliest spot of all,
The arrow struck him; madden’d with the pain
He rear’d, then plunging forward, with the shaft
Fix’d in his brain, and rolling in the dust,
The other steeds in dire confusion threw;
And while old Nestor with his sword essay’d
To cut the reins, and free the struggling horse,
Amid the rout down came the flying steeds
Of Hector, guided by no timid hand,
By Hector’s self; then had the old man paid
The forfeit of his life, but, good at need,
The valiant Diomed his peril saw,
And loudly shouting, on Ulysses call’d:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Why fliest thou, coward-like, amid the throng,
And in thy flight to the aim of hostile spears
Thy back presenting? stay, and here with me
From this fierce warrior guard the good old man.”

He said; but stout Ulysses heard him not,
And to the ships pursued his hurried way.
But in the front, Tydides, though alone,
Remain’d undaunted; by old Nestor’s car
He stood, and thus the aged chief address’d:
“Old man, these youthful warriors press thee sore,
Thy vigour spent, and with the weight of years
Oppress’d; and helpless too thy charioteer,
And slow thy horses; mount my car, and prove
How swift my steeds, or in pursuit or flight,
From those of Tros descended, scour the plain;
My noble prize from great Æneas won.
Leave to th’ attendants these; while mine we launch
Against the Trojan host, that Hector’s self
May know how strong my hand can hurl the spear.”

He said; and Nestor his advice obey’d:
The two attendants, valiant Sthenelus,
And good Eurymedon, his horses took,
While on Tydides’ car they mounted both.
The aged Nestor took the glitt’ring reins,
And urg’d the horses; Hector soon they met:
As on he came, his spear Tydides threw,
Yet struck not Hector; but his charioteer,
Who held the reins, the brave Thebaeus’ son,
Eniopeus, through the breast transfix’d,
Beside the nipple; from the car he fell,
The startled horses swerving at the sound;
And from his limbs the vital spirit fled.
Deep, for his comrade slain, was Hector’s grief;
Yet him, though griev’d, perforce he left to seek
A charioteer; nor wanted long his steeds
A guiding hand; for Archeptolemus,
Brave son of Iphitus, he quickly found,
And bade him mount his swiftly-flying car,
And to his hands the glitt’ring reins transferr’d.

Then fearful ruin had been wrought, and deeds
Untold achiev’d, and like a flock of lambs,
The adverse hosts been coop’d beneath the walls,
Had not the Sire of Gods and men beheld,
And with an awful peal of thunder hurl’d
His vivid lightning down; the fiery bolt
Before Tydides’ chariot plough’d the ground.
Fierce flash’d the sulph’rous flame, and whirling round
Beneath the yoke th’ affrighted horses quailed.

From Nestor’s hand escap’d the glitt’ring reins,
And, trembling, thus to Diomed he spoke:

“Turn we to flight, Tydides; see’st thou not,
That Jove from us his aiding hand withholds?
This day to Hector Saturn’s son decrees
The meed of vict’ry; on some future day,
If so he will, the triumph may be ours;
For man, how brave soe’er, cannot o’errule
The will of Jove, so much the mightier he.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“Truly, old man, and wisely dost thou speak;
But this the bitter grief that wrings my soul:
Some day, amid the councillors of Troy
Hector may say, ‘Before my presence scar’d
Tydides sought the shelter of the ships.’
Thus when he boasts, gape earth, and hide my shame!”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Great son of Tydeus, oh what words are these!
Should Hector brand thee with a coward’s name,
No credence would he gain from Trojan men,
Or Dardan, or from Trojan warriors’ wives,
Whose husbands in the dust thy hand hath laid.”

He said, and ’mid the general rout, to flight
He turn’d his horses; on the flying crowd,
With shouts of triumph, Hector at their head,
The men of Troy their murd’rous weapons show’r’d.
Loud shouted Hector of the glancing helm:
“Tydides, heretofore the warrior Greeks
Have held thee in much honour; plac’d on high
At banquets, and with lib’ral portions grac’d,
And flowing cups: but thou, from this day forth,
Shalt be their scorn! a woman’s soul is thine!
Out on thee, frighten’d girl! thou ne’er shalt scale
Our Trojan tow’rs, and see me basely fly;
Nor in thy ships our women bear away:
Ere such thy boast, my hand shall work thy doom.”

Thus he; and greatly was Tydides mov’d
To turn his horses, and confront his foe:
Thrice thus he doubted; thrice, at Jove’s command,
From Ida’s height the thunder peal’d, in sign
Of vict’ry swaying to the Trojan side.
Then to the Trojans Hector call’d aloud:
“Trojans, and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Put forth your wonted valour; for I know
That in his secret counsels Jove designs
Glory to me, disaster to the Greeks.
Fools, in those wretched walls that put their trust,
Scarce worthy notice, hopeless to withstand
My onset; and the trench that they have dug,
Our horses easily can overleap;
And when I reach the ships, be mindful ye,
To have at hand the fire, wherewith the ships
We may destroy, while they themselves shall fall
An easy prey, bewilder’d by the smoke.”

He said, and thus with cheering words address’d
His horses: “Xanthus, and, Podargus, thou,
Æthon and Lampus, now repay the care
On you bestow’d by fair Andromache,
Eetion’s royal daughter; bear in mind
How she with ample store of provender
Your mangers still supplied, before e’en I,
Her husband, from her hands the wine-cup took.
Put forth your speed, that we may make our prize
Of Nestor’s shield, whose praise extends to Heav’n,
Its handles, and itself, of solid gold;
And from the shoulders of Tydides strip
His gorgeous breastplate, work of Vulcan’s hand:
These could we take, methinks this very night
Would see the Greeks embarking on their ships.”

Such was his pray’r; but Juno on her throne
Trembled with rage, till great Olympus quak’d,
And thus to Neptune, mighty God, she spoke:
“O thou of boundless might, Earth-shaking God,
See’st thou unmov’d the ruin of the Greeks?
Yet they in Ægae and in Helice,
With grateful off’rings rich thine altars crown;
Then give we them the vict’ry; if we all
Who favour Greece, together should combine
To put to flight the Trojans, and restrain
All-seeing Jove, he might be left alone,
On Ida’s summit to digest his wrath.”

To whom, in anger, Neptune thus replied:
“O Juno, rash of speech, what words are these!
I dare not counsel that we all should join
’Gainst Saturn’s son; so much the stronger he.”

Such converse held they; all the space meanwhile
Within the trench, between the tow’r and ships,
Was closely throng’d with steeds and buckler’d men;
By noble Hector, brave as Mars, and led
By Jove to vict’ry, coop’d in narrow space;
Who now had burnt with fire the Grecian ships,
But Juno bade Atrides haste to rouse
Their fainting courage; through the camp he pass’d;
On his broad hand a purple robe he bore,
And stood upon Ulysses’ lofty ship,
The midmost, whence to shout to either side,
Or to the tents of Ajax Telamon,
Or of Achilles, who at each extreme,
Confiding in their strength, had moor’d their ships.

Thence to the Greeks he shouted, loud and clear:
“Shame on ye, Greeks, base cowards, brave alone
In outward semblance! where are now the vaunts
Which once (so highly of ourselves we deem’d)
Ye made, vain-glorious braggarts as ye were,
In Lemnos’ isle, when, feasting on the flesh
Of straight-horn’d oxen, and your flowing cups
Crowning with ruddy wine, not one of you,
But for a hundred Trojans in the field,
Or for two hundred, deem’d himself a match:
Now quail ye all before a single man,
Hector, who soon will wrap our ships in fire.
O Father Jove! what sov’reign e’er hast thou
So far deluded, of such glory robb’d?
Yet ne’er, on this disastrous voyage bent,
Have I unheeded pass’d thine altar by;
The choicest off’rings burning still on each,
In hopes to raze the well-built walls of Troy.
Yet to this pray’r at least thine ear incline;
Grant that this coast in safety we may leave,
Nor be by Trojans utterly subdued.”

He said; and Jove, with pity, saw his tears;
And, with a sign, his people’s safety vouch’d.
He sent an eagle, noblest bird that flies,
Who in his talons bore a wild deer’s fawn:
The fawn he dropp’d beside the holy shrine,
Where to the Lord of divination, Jove,
The Greeks were wont their solemn rites to pay.
The sign from Heav’n they knew; with courage fresh
Assail’d the Trojans, and the fight renew’d.
Then none of all the many Greeks might boast
That he, before Tydides, drove his car
Across the ditch, and mingled in the fight.
His was the hand that first a crested chief,
The son of Phradmon, Agelaus, struck.
He turn’d his car for flight; but as he turn’d,
The lance of Diomed, behind his neck,
Between the shoulders, through his chest was driv’n;
Headlong he fell, and loud his armour rang.

Next to Tydides, Agamemnon came,
And Menelaus, Atreus’ godlike sons;
Th’ Ajaces both, in dauntless courage cloth’d;
Idomeneus, with whom Meriones,
His faithful comrade, terrible as Mars;
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son;
The ninth was Teucer, who, with bended bow,
Behind the shield of Ajax Telamon
Took shelter; Ajax o’er him held his shield;
Thence look’d he round, and aim’d amid the crowd;
And as he saw each Trojan, wounded, fall,
Struck by his shafts, to Ajax close he press’d,
As to its mother’s shelt’ring arms a child,
Conceal’d and safe beneath the ample targe.

Say then, who first of all the Trojans fell
By Teucer’s arrows slain? Orsilochus,
And Ophelestes, Daetor, Ormenus,
And godlike Lycophontes, Chromius,
And Amopaon, Polyaemon’s son,
And valiant Melanippus: all of these,
Each after other, Teucer laid in dust.
Him Agamemnon, with his well-strung bow
Thinning the Trojan ranks, with joy beheld,
And, standing at his side, address’d him thus:
“Teucer, good comrade, son of Telamon,
Shoot ever thus, if thou wouldst be the light
And glory of the Greeks, and of thy sire,
Who nursed thine infancy, and in his house
Maintain’d, though bastard; him, though distant far,
To highest fame let thine achievements raise.
This too I say, and will make good my word:
If by the grace of aegis-bearing Jove,
And Pallas, Ilium’s well-built walls we raze,
A gift of honour, second but to mine,
I in thy hands will place; a tripod bright,
Or, with their car and harness, two brave steeds,
Or a fair woman who thy bed may share.”

To whom in answer valiant Teucer thus:
“Most mighty son of Atreus, why excite
Who lacks not zeal? To th’ utmost of my pow’r
Since first we drove the Trojans back, I watch,
Unceasing, every chance to ply my shafts.
Eight barbed arrows have I shot e’en now,
And in a warrior each has found its mark;
That savage hound alone defeats my aim.”

At Hector, as he spoke, another shaft
He shot, ambitious of so great a prize:
He miss’d his aim; but Priam’s noble son
Gorgythion, through the breast his arrow struck,
Whom from Æsyme brought, a wedded bride
Of heavenly beauty, Castianeira bore.
Down sank his head, as in a garden sinks
A ripen’d poppy charg’d with vernal rains;
So sank his head beneath his helmet’s weight.
At Hector yet another arrow shot
Teucer, ambitious of so great a prize;
Yet this too miss’d, by Phoebus turn’d aside;
But Archeptolemus, the charioteer
Of Hector, onward hurrying, through the breast
It struck, beside the nipple; from the car
He fell; aside the startled horses swerv’d;
And as he fell the vital spirit fled.
Deep, for his comrade slain, was Hector’s grief;
Yet him, though griev’d at heart, perforce he left,
And to Cebriones, his brother, call’d,
Then near at hand, the horses’ reins to take;
He heard, and straight obey’d; then Hector leap’d
Down from his glitt’ring chariot to the ground,
His fearful war-cry shouting; in his hand
A pond’rous stone he carried; and, intent
To strike him down, at Teucer straight he rush’d.
He from his quiver chose a shaft in haste,
And fitted to the cord; but as he drew
The sinew, Hector of the glancing helm
Hurl’d the huge mass of rock, which Teucer struck
Near to the shoulder, where the collar-bone
Joins neck and breast, the spot most opportune,
And broke the tendon; paralys’d, his arm
Dropp’d helpless by his side; upon his knees
He fell, and from his hands let fall the bow.
Not careless Ajax saw his brother’s fall,
But o’er him spread in haste his cov’ring shield.
Two faithful friends, Mecisteus, Echius’ son,
And brave Alastor, from the press withdrew,
And bore him, deeply groaning, to the ships.

Then Jove again the Trojan courage fir’d,
And backward to the ditch they forc’d the Greeks.
Proud of his prowess, Hector led them on;
And as a hound that, fleet of foot, o’ertakes
Or boar or lion, object of his chase,
Springs from behind, and fastens on his flank,
Yet careful watches, lest he turn to bay:
So Hector press’d upon the long-hair’d Greeks,
Slaying the hindmost; they in terror fled.
But, pass’d at length the ditch and palisade,
With loss of many by the Trojans slain,
Before the ships they rallied from their flight,
And one to other call’d: and one and all
With hands uplifted, pray’d to all the Gods;
While Hector, here and there, on ev’ry side
His flying coursers wheel’d, with eyes that flash’d
Awful as Gorgon’s, or as blood-stain’d Mars.

Juno, the white-arm’d Queen, with pity mov’d,
To Pallas thus her winged words address’d:
“O Heav’n, brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Can we, ev’n now, in this their sorest need,
Refuse the Greeks our aid, by one subdued,
One single man, of pride unbearable,
Hector, the son of Priam, who e’en now,
Hath caus’d them endless grief?” To whom again
The blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus replied:
“I too would fain behold him robb’d of life,
In his own country slain by Grecian hands;
But that my sire, by ill advice misled,
Rages in wrath, still thwarting all my plans;
Forgetting now how oft his son I sav’d,
Sore wearied with the toils Eurystheus gave.
Oft would his tears ascend to Heav’n, and oft
From Heav’n would Jove despatch me to his aid;
But if I then had known what now I know,
When to the narrow gates of Pluto’s realm
He sent him forth to bring from Erebus
Its guardian dog, he never had return’d
In safety from the marge of Styx profound.
He holds me now in hatred, and his ear
To Thetis lends, who kiss’d his knees, and touch’d
His beard, and pray’d him to avenge her son
Achilles; yet the time shall come when I
Shall be once more his own dear blue-ey’d Maid.
But haste thee now, prepare for us thy car,
While to the house of aegis-bearing Jove
I go, and don my armour for the fight,
To prove if Hector of the glancing helm,
The son of Priam, will unmov’d behold
Us two advancing o’er the pass of war;
Or if the flesh of Trojans, slain by Greeks,
Shall sate the maw of rav’ning dogs and birds.”

She said: the white-arm’d Queen her word obey’d.
Juno, great Goddess, royal Saturn’s child,
The horses brought, with golden frontlets crown’d;
While Pallas, child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Within her father’s threshold dropp’d her veil
Of airy texture, work of her own hands;
The cuirass donn’d of cloud-compelling Jove,
And stood accoutred for the bloody fray.
The fiery car she mounted; in her hand
A spear she bore, long, weighty, tough; wherewith
The mighty daughter of a mighty sire
Sweeps down the ranks of those her wrath pursues.
Then Juno sharply touch’d the flying steeds;
Forthwith spontaneous opening, grated harsh
The heavenly portals, guarded by the Hours,
Who Heav’n and high Olympus have in charge,
To roll aside or close the veil of cloud;
Through these th’ excited horses held their way.

From Ida’s heights the son of Saturn saw,
And, fill’d with wrath, the heav’nly messenger,
The golden-winged Iris, thus bespoke:
“Haste thee, swift Iris; turn them back, and warn
That farther they advance not: ’tis not meet
That they and I in war should be oppos’d.
This too I say, and will make good my words:
Their flying horses I will lame; themselves
Dash from their car, and break their chariot-wheels;
And ten revolving years heal not the wound
Where strikes my lightning; so shall Pallas learn
What ’tis against her father to contend.
Juno less moves my wonder and my wrath;
Whate’er I plan, ’tis still her wont to thwart.”
Thus he: from Ida to Olympus’ height
The storm-swift Iris on her errand sped.
At many-ridg’d Olympus’ outer gate
She met the Goddesses, and stay’d their course,
And thus convey’d the sov’reign will of Jove:

“Whither away? what madness fills your breasts?
To give the Greeks your succour, Jove forbids;
And thus he threatens, and will make it good:
Your flying horses he will lame; yourselves
Dash from the car, and break your chariot-wheels;
And ten revolving years heal not the wounds
His lightning makes: so, Pallas, shalt thou learn
What ’tis against thy father to contend.
Juno less moves his wonder and his wrath;
Whate’er he plans, ’tis still her wont to thwart;
But over-bold and void of shame art thou,
If against Jove thou dare to lift thy spear.”

Thus as she spoke, swift Iris disappear’d.
Then Juno thus to Pallas spoke: “No more,
Daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, can we
For mortal men his sov’reign will resist;
Live they or die, as each man’s fate may be;
While he, ’twixt Greeks and Trojans, as ’tis meet,
His own designs accomplishing, decides.”
She said, and backward turn’d her horses’ heads.
The horses from the car the Hours unyok’d,
And safely tether’d in the heav’nly stalls;
The car they rear’d against the inner wall,
That brightly polish’d shone; the Goddesses
Themselves meanwhile, amid th’ Immortals all,
With, sorrowing hearts on golden seats reclin’d.

Ere long, on swiftly-rolling chariot borne,
Jove to Olympus, to th’ abode of Gods,
From Ida’s height return’d: th’ earth-shaking God,
Neptune, unyok’d his steeds; and on the stand
Secur’d the car, and spread the cov’ring o’er.
Then on his golden throne all-seeing Jove
Sat down; beneath his feet Olympus shook.
Juno and Pallas only sat aloof;
No word they utter’d, no enquiry made.
Jove knew their thoughts, and thus address’d them both:
“Pallas and Juno, wherefore sit ye thus
In angry silence? In the glorious fight
No lengthen’d toil have ye sustain’d, to slay
The Trojans, whom your deadly hate pursues.
Not all the Gods that on Olympus dwell
Could turn me from my purpose, such my might,
And such the pow’r of my resistless hand;
But ye were struck with terror ere ye saw
The battle-field, and fearful deeds of war.
But this I say, and bear it in your minds,
Had I my lightning launch’d, and from your car
Had hurl’d ye down, ye ne’er had reach’d again
Olympus’ height, th’ immortal Gods’ abode.”

So spoke the God; but, seated side by side,
Juno and Pallas glances interchang’d
Of ill portent for Troy; Pallas indeed
Sat silent, and, though inly wroth with Jove,
Yet answer’d not a word; but Juno’s breast
Could not contain her rage, and thus she spoke:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Well do we know thy pow’r invincible,
Yet deeply grieve we for the warlike Greeks,
Condemn’d to hopeless ruin: from the fight,
Since such is thy command, we stand aloof;
But yet some saving counsel may we give,
Lest in thine anger thou destroy them quite.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Yet greater slaughter, stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n,
To-morrow shalt thou see, if so thou list,
Wrought on the warrior Greeks by Saturn’s son;
For Hector’s proud career shall not be check’d
Until the wrath of Peleus’ godlike son
Beside the ships be kindled, in the day
When round Patroclus’ corpse, in narrow space,
E’en by the vessels’ sterns, the war shall rage.
Such is the voice of destiny: for thee,
I reck not of thy wrath; nor should I care
Though thou wert thrust beneath the lowest deep
Of earth and ocean, where Iapetus
And Saturn lie, uncheer’d by ray of sun
Or breath of air, in Tartarus profound.
Though there thou wert to banishment consign’d,
I should not heed, but thy reproaches hear
Unmov’d; for viler thing is none than thou.”
He said, but white-arm’d Juno answer’d not.

The sun, now sunk beneath the ocean wave,
Drew o’er the teeming earth the veil of night.
The Trojans saw, reluctant, day’s decline;
But on the Greeks thrice welcome, thrice invoked
With earnest prayers, the shades of darkness fell.

The noble Hector then to council call’d
The Trojan leaders; from the ships apart
He led them, by the eddying river’s side,
To a clear space of ground, from corpses free.
They from their cars dismounting, to the words
Of godlike Hector listen’d: in his hand
His massive spear he held, twelve cubits long,
Whose glitt’ring point flash’d bright, with hoop of gold
Encircled round; on this he leant, and said,
“Hear me, ye Trojans, Dardans, and Allies;
I hop’d that to the breezy heights of Troy
We might ere now in triumph have return’d,
The Grecian ships and all the Greeks destroy’d:
But night hath come too soon, and sav’d awhile
The Grecian army and their stranded ships.
Then yield we to the night; prepare the meal;
Unyoke your horses, and before them place
Their needful forage; from the city bring
Oxen and sheep; the luscious wine provide;
Bring bread from out our houses; and collect
Good store of fuel, that the livelong night,
E’en till the dawn of day, may broadly blaze
Our num’rous watchfires, and illume the Heav’ns;
Lest, e’en by night, the long-hair’d Greeks should seek
O’er the broad bosom of the sea to fly,
That so not unassail’d they may embark,
Nor undisturb’d; but haply some may bear,
E’en to their homes, the mem’ry of a wound
Receiv’d from spear or arrow, as on board
They leap’d in haste; and others too may fear
To tempt with hostile arms the pow’r of Troy.
Then let the sacred heralds’ voice proclaim
Throughout the city, that the stripling youths
And hoary-headed sires allot themselves
In sev’ral watches to the Heav’n-built tow’rs.
Charge too the women, in their houses each,
To kindle blazing fires; let careful watch
Be set, lest, in the absence of the men,
The town by secret ambush be surpris’d.
Such, valiant Trojans, is th’ advice I give;
And what to-night your wisdom shall approve
Will I, at morn, before the Trojans speak.
Hopeful, to Jove I pray, and all the Gods,
To chase from hence these fate-inflicted hounds,
By fate sent hither on their dark-ribb’d ships.
Now keep we through the night our watchful guard;
And with the early dawn, equipp’d in arms,
Upon their fleet our angry battle pour.
Then shall I know if Tydeus’ valiant son
Back from the ships shall drive me to the walls,
Or I, triumphant, bear his bloody spoils:
To-morrow morn his courage will decide,
If he indeed my onset will await.
But ere to-morrow’s sun be high in Heav’n,
He, ’mid the foremost, if I augur right,
Wounded and bleeding in the dust shall lie,
And many a comrade round him. Would to Heav’n
I were as sure to be from age and death
Exempt, and held in honour as a God,
Phoebus, or Pallas, as I am assur’d
The coming day is fraught with ill to Greece.”

Thus Hector spoke; the Trojans shouted loud:
Then from the yoke the sweating steeds they loos’d,
And tether’d each beside their sev’ral cars:
Next from the city speedily they brought
Oxen and sheep; the luscious wine procur’d;
Brought bread from out their houses, and good store
Of fuel gather’d; wafted from the plain,
The winds to Heav’n the sav’ry odours bore.
Full of proud hopes, upon the pass of war,
All night they camp’d; and frequent blaz’d their fires.

As when in Heav’n, around the glitt’ring moon
The stars shine bright amid the breathless air;
And ev’ry crag, and ev’ry jutting peak
Stands boldly forth, and ev’ry forest glade;
Ev’n to the gates of Heav’n is open’d wide
The boundless sky; shines each particular star
Distinct; joy fills the gazing shepherd’s heart.
So bright, so thickly scatter’d o’er the plain,
Before the walls of Troy, between the ships
And Xanthus’ stream, the Trojan watchfires blaz’d.

A thousand fires burnt brightly; and round each
Sat fifty warriors in the ruddy glare;
Champing the provender before them laid,
Barley and rye, the tether’d horses stood
Beside the cars, and waited for the morn.



ARGUMENT.

THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


Agamemnon, after the last day’s defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit
the siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to
be strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures
were to be followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice,
and Nestor farther prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles in
order to move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice
of, who are accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very
moving and pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by
Achilles, who notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The
ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake
themselves to sleep.

This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night,
which is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene
lies on the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.

BOOK IX.

Thus kept their watch, the Trojans; but the Greeks
Dire Panic held, companion of chill Fear,
Their bravest struck with grief unbearable.
As when two stormy winds ruffle the sea,
Boreas and Zephyr, from the hills of Thrace
With sudden gust descending; the dark waves
Rear high their angry crests, and toss on shore
Masses of tangled weed; such stormy grief
The breast of ev’ry Grecian warrior rent.

Atrides, heart-struck, wander’d to and fro,
And to the clear-voic’d heralds gave command
To call, but not with proclamation loud,
Each sev’ral man to council; he himself
Spar’d not his labour, mixing with the chiefs.
Sadly they sat in council; Atreus’ son,
Weeping, arose; as some dark-water’d fount
Pours o’er a craggy steep its gloomy stream;
Then with deep groans th’ assembled Greeks address’d:
“O friends! the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Grievous, and all unlook’d for, is the blow
Which Jove hath dealt me; by his promise led
I hop’d to raze the strong-built walls of Troy,
And home return in safety; but it seems
He falsifies his word, and bids me now
Return to Argos, frustrate of my hope,
Dishonour’d, and with grievous loss of men.
Such now appears th’ o’er-ruling sov’reign will
Of Saturn’s son, who oft hath sunk the heads
Of many a lofty city in the dust,
And yet will sink; for mighty is his hand.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
Home to direct our course: since here in vain
We strive to take the well-built walls of Troy.”

The monarch spoke; they all in silence heard:
In speechless sorrow long they sat: at length
Rose valiant Diomed, and thus he spoke:
“Atrides, I thy folly must confront,
As is my right, in council: thou, O King!
Be not offended: once, among the Greeks
Thou heldest light my prowess, with the name
Of coward branding me; how justly so
Is known to all the Greeks, both young and old.
On thee the deep-designing Saturn’s son
In diff’ring measure hath his gifts bestow’d:
A throne he gives thee, higher far than all;
But valour, noblest boon of Heav’n, denies.
How canst thou hope the sons of Greece shall prove
Such heartless dastards as thy words suppose?
If homeward to return thy mind be fix’d,
Depart; the way is open, and the ships,
Which from Mycenæ follow’d thee in crowds,
Are close at hand, and ready to be launch’d.
Yet will the other long-hair’d Greeks remain
Till Priam’s city fall: nay, though the rest
Betake them to their ships, and sail for home,
Yet I and Sthenelus, we two, will fight
Till Troy be ours; for Heav’n is on our side.”

Thus he; the sons of Greece, with loud applause,
The speech of valiant Diomed confirm’d.

Then aged Nestor rose, and thus began:
“Tydides, eminent thou art in war;
And In the council thy compeers in age
Must yield to thee; thy present words, no Greek
Can censure, or gainsay; and yet the end
Thou hast not reach’d, and object of debate.
But thou art young, and for thine age mightst be
My latest born; yet dost thou to the Kings
Sage counsel give, and well in season speak.
But now will I, that am thine elder far,
Go fully through the whole; and none my words
May disregard, not ev’n Atrides’ self.
Outcast from kindred, law, and hearth is he
Whose soul delights in fierce internal strife.
But yield we now to th’ influence of night:
Prepare the meal; and let the sev’ral guards
Be posted by the ditch, without the wall.
This duty on the younger men I lay:
Then, Agamemnon, thou thy part perform;
For thou art King supreme; the Elders all,
As meet and seemly, to the feast invite:
Thy tents are full of wine, which Grecian ships
O’er the wide sea bring day by day from Thrace;
Nor lack’st thou aught thy guests to entertain,
And many own thy sway; when all are met,
His counsel take, who gives the best advice;
Great need we have of counsel wise and good,
When close beside our ships the hostile fires
Are burning: who can this unmov’d behold?
This night our ruin or our safety sees.”

He said; and they, assenting, heard his speech.
Forth with their followers went th’ appointed guards,
The princely Thrasymedes, Nestor’s son,
Ascalaphus, and bold Ialmenus,
Two valiant sons of Mars; Meriones,
And Aphareus, and brave Deipyrus,
And godlike Lycomedes, Creon’s son.
Sev’n were the leaders; and with each went forth
A hundred gallant youths, with lances arm’d.
Between the ditch and wall they took their post;
There lit their fires, and there the meal prepar’d.

Then for th’ assembled Elders in his tent
An ample banquet Agamemnon spread;
They on the viands, set before them, fell:
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
The aged Nestor first his mind disclos’d
He who, before, the sagest counsel gave,
Now thus with prudent words began, and said:

“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
With thee, Atrides, my discourse shall end,
With thee begin: o’er many nations thou
Hold’st sov’reign sway; since Jove to thee hath giv’n
The sceptre, and the high prerogative,
To be thy people’s judge and counsellor,
’Tis thine to speak the word, ’tis thine to hear
And to determine, when some other chief
Suggestions offers in the gen’ral cause:
What counsel shall prevail, depends on thee:
Yet will I say what seems to me the best.
Sounder opinion none can hold than this,
Which I maintain, and ever have maintain’d,
Ev’n from the day when thou, great King, didst bear
The fair Briseis from Achilles’ tent
Despite his anger—not by my advice:
I fain would have dissuaded thee, but thou,
Following the dictates of thy wrathful pride,
Didst to our bravest wrong, dishon’ring him
Whom ev’n th’ Immortals honour’d; for his prize
Thou took’st and still retain’st; but let us now
Consider, if ev’n yet, with costly gifts
And soothing words, we may his wrath appease.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Father, too truly thou recall’st my fault:
I err’d, nor will deny it; as a host
Is he whom Jove in honour holds, as now
Achilles hon’ring, he confounds the Greeks,
But if I err’d, by evil impulse led,
Fain would I now conciliate him, and pay
An ample penalty; before you all
I pledge myself rich presents to bestow.
Sev’n tripods will I give, untouch’d by fire;
Of gold, ten talents, twenty caldrons bright,
Twelve pow’rful horses, on the course renown’d,
Who by their speed have many prizes won.
Not empty-handed could that man be deem’d,
Nor poor in gold, who but so much possess’d
As by those horses has for me been won.
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
Lesbians, whom I selected for myself,
That day he captur’d Lesbos’ goodly isle,
In beauty far surpassing all their sex:
These will I give; and with them will I send
The fair Briseis, her whom from his tent
I bore away; and add a solemn oath,
I ne’er approach’d her bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
All these shall now be his: but if the Gods
Shall grant us Priam’s city to destroy,
Of gold and brass, when we divide the spoil,
With countless heaps he shall a vessel freight,
And twenty captives he himself shall choose,
All only less than Argive Helen fair.
And if it be our fate to see again
The teeming soil of Argos, he shall be
My son by marriage; and in honour held
As is Orestes, who, my only son,
Is rear’d at home in luxury and ease.
Three daughters fair I have, Chrysothemis,
Iphianassa, and Laodice;
Of these, whiche’er he will, to Peleus’ house,
No portion ask’d for, he shall take to wife;
And with her will I add such wedding gifts,
As never man before to daughter gave.
Sev’n prosp’rous towns besides; Cardamyle,
And Enope, and Ira’s grassy plains;
And Pherae, and Antheia’s pastures deep,
Æpeia fair, and vine-clad Pedasus;
All by the sea, by sandy Pylos’ bounds.
The dwellers there in flocks and herds are rich,
And, as a God, shall honour him with gifts,
And to his sceptre ample tribute pay.
This will I do, so he his wrath remit:
Then let him yield (Pluto alone remains
Unbending and inexorable; and thence
Of all the Gods is most abhorr’d of men),
To me submitting, as in royal pow’r
Superior far, and more advanc’d in age.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Atrides, not unworthy are the gifts,
Which to Achilles thou design’st to send:
Then to the tent of Peleus’ son in haste
Let us our chosen messengers despatch:
Whom I shall choose, let them consent to go.
Then first of all let Phoenix lead the way,
Beloved of Jove; the mighty Ajax next:
With them, Ulysses sage; and let them take,
Of heralds, Hodius and Eurybates.
Bring now the hallowing water for our hands;
And bid be silent, while to Saturn’s son,
That he have mercy, we address our pray’r.”

He said, and well his counsel pleas’d them all;
The heralds pour’d the water on their hands;
The youths, attending, crown’d the bowls with wine,
And in due order serv’d the cups to all.
Then, their libations made, when each with wine
Had satisfied his soul, from out the tent
Of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, they pass’d;
And many a caution aged Nestor gave,
With rapid glance to each, Ulysses chief,
How best to soften Peleus’ matchless son.

Beside the many-dashing ocean’s shore
They mov’d along; and many a pray’r address’d
To Neptune, Ocean’s Earth-surrounding God,
That he to gentle counsels would incline
The haughty soul of great Æacides.
When to the ships and tents they came, where lay
The warlike Myrmidons, their chief they found
His spirit soothing with a sweet-ton’d lyre,
Of curious work, with silver band adorn’d;
Part of the spoil he took, when he destroy’d
Eetion’s wealthy town; on this he play’d,
Soothing his soul, and sang of warriors’ deeds.
Before the chief, in silence and alone
Patroclus sat, upon Achilles fix’d
His eyes, awaiting till the song should cease.
The envoys forward stepp’d, Ulysses first,
And stood before him; from his couch, amaz’d,
And holding still his lyre, Achilles sprang,
Leaving the seat whereon they found him plac’d;
And at their entrance rose Patroclus too:
Waving his hand, Achilles, swift of foot,
Addressed them: “Welcome, friends! as friends ye come:
Some great occasion surely to my tent
Hath brought the men who are, of all the Greeks,
Despite my anger, dearest to my heart.”

Thus as he spoke, he led them in, and plac’d
On couches spread with, purple carpets o’er,
Then thus address’d Patroclus at his side:
“Son of Menoetius, set upon the board
A larger bowl, and stronger mix the wine,
And serve a cup to each: beneath my roof
This night my dearest friends I entertain.”
He said; Patroclus his commands obey’d;
And in the fire-light plac’d an ample tray,
And on it laid of goat’s flesh and of sheep’s
A saddle each; and with them, rich in fat,
A chine of well-fed hog; Automedon
Held fast, while great Achilles carv’d the joints.
The meat, prepar’d, he fix’d upon the spits:
Patroclus kindled then a blazing fire;
And when the fire burnt hotly, and the flame
Subsided, spread the glowing embers out,
And hung the spits above; then sprinkled o’er
The meat with salt, and lifted from the stand.
The viands cook’d and plac’d upon the board,
From baskets fair Patroclus portion’d out
The bread to each; the meat Achilles shar’d.
Facing the sage Ulysses, sat the host
On th’ other side the tent; and bade his friend,
Patroclus, give the Gods their honours due:
He in the fire the wonted off’rings burnt:
They on the viands set before them fell.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Ajax to Phoenix sign’d: Ulysses saw
The sign, and rising, fill’d a cup with wine,
And pledg’d Achilles thus: “To thee I drink,
Achilles! nobly is thy table spread,
As heretofore in Agamemnon’s tent,
So now in thine; abundant is the feast:
But not the pleasures of the banquet now
We have in hand: impending o’er our arms
Grave cause of fear, illustrious chief, we see;
Grave doubts, to save, or see destroy’d our ships,
If thou, great warrior, put not forth thy might.
For close beside the ships and wall are camp’d
The haughty Trojans and renown’d allies:
Their watch-fires frequent burn throughout the camp;
And loud their boast that nought shall stay their hands,
Until our dark-ribb’d ships be made their prey.
Jove too for them, with fav’ring augury
Sends forth his lightning; boastful of his strength,
And firmly trusting in the aid of Jove,
Hector, resistless, rages; nought he fears
Or God or man, with martial fury fir’d.
He prays, impatient, for th’ approach of morn;
Then, breaking through the lofty sterns, resolv’d
To the devouring flames to give the ships,
And slay the crews, bewilder’d in the smoke.
And much my mind misgives me, lest the Gods
His threats fulfil, and we be fated here
To perish, far from Argos’ grassy plains.
Up then! if in their last extremity
Thy spirit inclines, though late, to save the Greeks
Sore press’d by Trojan arms: lest thou thyself
Hereafter feel remorse; the evil done
Is past all cure; then thou reflect betimes
How from the Greeks to ward the day of doom.
Dear friend, remember now thy father’s words,
The aged Peleus, when to Atreus’ son
He sent thee forth from Phthia, how he said,
‘My son, the boon of strength, if so they will,
Juno or Pallas have the pow’r to give;
But thou thyself thy haughty spirit must curb.
For better far is gentle courtesy:
And cease from angry strife, that so the Greeks
The more may honour thee, both young and old.’
Such were the words thine aged father spoke,
Which thou hast now forgotten; yet, e’en now,
Pause for awhile, and let thine anger cool;
And noble gifts, so thou thy wrath remit,
From Agamemnon shalt thou bear away.
Listen to me, while I recount the gifts
Which in his tent he pledg’d him to bestow.
Sev’n tripods promis’d he, untouch’d by fire,
Of gold, ten talents, twenty caldrons bright,
Twelve pow’rful horses, in the course renown’d.
Who by their speed have many prizes won.
Not empty-handed could that man be deem’d,
Nor poor in gold, who but so much possess’d
As by those horses has for him been won.
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
Lesbians, whom he selected for himself,
That day thou captur’dst Lesbos’ goodly isle,
In beauty far surpassing all their sex.
These will he give; and with them will he send
The fair Briseis, her whom from thy tent
He bore away; and add a solemn oath,
He ne’er approach’d her bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
All these shall now be thine: but if the Gods
Shall grant us Priam’s city to destroy,
Of gold and brass, when we divide the spoil,
With countless heaps a vessel shalt thou freight,
And twenty captives thou thyself shalt choose,
All only less than Argive Helen fair.
And if it be our fate to see again
The teeming soil of Argos, thou mayst be
His son by marriage, and in honour held
As is Orestes, who, his only son,
Is rear’d at home in luxury, and ease.
Three daughters fair are his, Chrysothemis,
Iphianassa, and Laodice;
Of these whiche’er thou wilt, to Peleus’ house,
No portion ask’d for, thou shalt take to wife;
And with her will he add such wedding gifts,
As never man before to daughter gave.
Sev’n prosp’rous towns besides; Cardamyle,
And Enope, and Ira’s grassy plains,
And Pherae, and Antheia’s pastures deep,
Æpeia fair, and vine-clad Pedasus;
All by the sea, by sandy Pylos’ bounds.
The dwellers there in flocks and herds are rich,
And, as a God, will honour thee with gifts,
And to thy sceptre ample tribute pay.
All these he gives, so thou thy wrath remit.
But if thou hold Atrides in such hate,
Him and his gifts, yet let thy pity rest
On all the other Greeks, thus sore bested;
By whom thou shalt be honour’d as a God:
For great the triumph that thou now mayst gain;
E’en Hector’s self is now within thy reach;
For he is near at hand; and in his pride
And martial fury deems that none, of all
Our ships contain, can rival him in arms.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Heav’n-born Ulysses, sage in council, son
Of great Laertes, I must frankly speak
My mind at once, my fix’d resolve declare:
That from henceforth I may not by the Greeks,
By this man and by that, be importun’d.
Him as the gates of hell my soul abhors,
Whose outward words his secret thoughts belie,
Hear then what seems to me the wisest course.
On me nor Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Nor others shall prevail, since nought is gain’d
By toil unceasing in the battle field.
Who nobly fight, but share with those who skulk;
Like honours gain the coward and the brave;
Alike the idlers and the active die:
And nought it profits me, though day by day
In constant toil I set my life at stake;
But as a bird, though ill she fare herself,
Brings to her callow brood the food she takes,
So I through many a sleepless night have lain,
And many a bloody day have labour’d through,
Engag’d in battle on your wives’ behalf.
Twelve cities have I taken with my ships;
Eleven more by land, on Trojan soil:
From all of these abundant stores of wealth
I took, and all to Agamemnon gave;
He, safe beside his ships, my spoils receiv’d,
A few divided, but the most retain’d.
To other chiefs and Kings he meted out
Their sev’ral portions, and they hold them still;
From me, from me alone of all the Greeks,
He bore away, and keeps my cherish’d wife;
Well! let him keep her, solace of his bed!
But say then, why do Greeks with Trojans fight?
Why hath Atrides brought this mighty host
To Troy, if not in fair-hair’d Helen’s cause?
Of mortals are there none that love their wives,
Save Atreus’ sons alone? or do not all,
Who boast the praise of sense and virtue, love
And cherish each his own? as her I lov’d
E’en from my soul, though captive of my spear.
Now, since he once hath robb’d me, and deceiv’d,
Let him not seek my aid; I know him now,
And am not to be won; let him devise,
With thee, Ulysses, and the other Kings,
How best from hostile fires to save his ships.
He hath completed many mighty works
Without my aid; hath built a lofty wall,
And dug a trench around it, wide and deep,
And in the trench hath fix’d a palisade;
Nor so the warrior-slayer Hector’s might
Can keep in check; while I was in the field,
Not far without the walls would Hector range
His line of battle, nor beyond the Oak
And Scaean gates would venture; there indeed
He once presum’d to meet me, hand to hand,
And from my onset narrowly escap’d.
But as with Hector now no more I fight,
To-morrow morn, my off’rings made to Jove,
And all the Gods, and freighted well my ships,
And launch’d upon the main, thyself shall see,
If that thou care to see, my vessels spread
O’er the broad bosom of the Hellespont,
My lusty crews plying the vig’rous oar;
And if th’ Earth-shaker send a fav’ring breeze,
Three days will bear us home to Phthia’s shore.
There did I leave abundant store of wealth,
When hitherward I took my luckless way;
Thither from hence I bear, of ruddy gold,
And brass, and women fair, and iron hoar
The share assign’d me; but my chiefest prize
The monarch Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Himself who gave, with insult takes away.
To him then speak aloud the words I send,
That all may know his crimes, if yet he hope
Some other Greek by treach’rous wiles to cheat,
Cloth’d as he is in shamelessness! my glance,
All brazen as he is, he dare not meet.
I share no more his counsels, nor his acts;
He hath deceiv’d me once, and wrong’d; again
He shall not cozen me! Of him, enough!
I pass him by, whom Jove hath robb’d of sense.
His gifts I loathe, and spurn; himself I hold
At a hair’s worth; and would he proffer me
Tenfold or twentyfold of all he has,
Or ever may be his; or all the gold
Sent to Orchomenos or royal Thebes,
Egyptian, treasurehouse of countless wealth,
Who boasts her hundred gates, through each of which
With horse and car two hundred warriors march:
Nay, were his gifts in number as the sand,
Or dust upon the plain, yet ne’er will I
By Agamemnon be prevail’d upon,
Till I have paid him back my heart’s offence.
Nor e’er of Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Will I a daughter wed; not were she fair
As golden Venus, and in works renown’d
As Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, yet her e’en so
I wed not; let him choose some other Greek,
Some fitting match, of nobler blood than mine.
But should the Gods in safety bring me home,
At Peleus’ hands I may receive a wife;
And Greece can boast of many a lovely maid,
In Hellas or in Phthia, daughters fair
Of chiefs who hold their native fortresses:
Of these, at will, a wife I may select:
And ofttimes hath my warlike soul inclin’d
To take a wedded wife, a fitting bride,
And aged Peleus’ wealth in peace enjoy.
For not the stores which Troy, they say, contain’d
In peaceful times, ere came the sons of Greece,
Nor all the treasures which Apollo’s shrine,
The Archer-God, in rock-built Pythos holds,
May weigh with life; of oxen and of sheep
Successful forays may good store provide;
And tripods may be gain’d, and noble steeds:
But when the breath of man hath pass’d his lips,
Nor strength nor foray can the loss repair.
I by my Goddess-mother have been warn’d,
The silver-footed Thetis, that o’er me
A double chance of destiny impends:
If here remaining, round the walls of Troy
I wage the war, I ne’er shall see my home,
But then undying glory shall be mine:
If I return, and see my native land,
My glory all is gone; but length of life
Shall then be mine, and death be long deferr’d.
If others ask’d my counsel, I should say,
‘Homeward direct your course; of lofty Troy
Ye see not yet the end; all-seeing Jove
O’er her extends his hand; on him relying
Her people all with confidence are fill’d.’
Go then; my answer to the chiefs of Greece
Speak boldly—such the privilege of age—
Bid that some better counsel they devise
To save their ships and men; their present scheme,
My anger unappeas’d, avails them nought.
But Phoenix here shall stay, and sleep to-night;
And with the morrow he with me shall sail
And seek our native land, if so he will:
For not by force will I remove him hence.”

He said; they all, confounded by his words,
In silence heard; so sternly did he speak.
At length, in tears, the aged Phoenix spoke,
For greatly fear’d he for the ships of Greece:
“If, great Achilles, on returning home
Thy mind is set, nor canst thou be induc’d
To save the ships from fire, so fierce thy wrath;
How then, dear boy, can I remain behind,
Alone? whom with thee aged Peleus sent,
That day when he in Agamemnon’s cause
From Phthia sent thee, inexperienc’d yet
In all the duties of confed’rate war,
And sage debate, on which attends renown.
Me then he sent, instructor of thy youth,
To prompt thy language, and thine acts to guide.
So not from thee, dear boy, can I consent
To part, though Heav’n should undertake my age
To prompt thy language, and thine acts to guide.
So not from thee, dear boy, can I consent
To part, though Heav’n should undertake my age
To wipe away, and vig’rous youth restore,
Such as I boasted, when from Greece I fled
Before my angry sire, Amyntor, son
Of Ormenus; a fair-hair’d concubine
Cause of the quarrel; her my father lov’d,
And by her love estrang’d, despis’d his wife,
My mother; oft she pray’d me to seduce,
To vex th’ old man, my father’s concubine;
I yielded; he, suspecting, on my head
A curse invok’d, and on the Furies call’d
His curse to witness, that upon his knees
No child, by me begotten, e’er should sit:
His curse the Gods have heard, and ratified,
Th’ infernal King, and awful Proserpine.
Then would I fain have slain him with the sword,
Had not some God my rising fury quell’d,
And set before my mind the public voice,
The odium I should have to bear ’mid Greeks,
If branded with the name of patricide.
But longer in my angry father’s house
To dwell, my spirit brook’d not, though my friends
And kinsmen all besought me to remain;
And many a goodly sheep, and many a steer
They slew, and many swine, with fat o’erlaid,
They sing’d, and roasted o’er the burning coals;
And drank in many a cup the old man’s wine.
Nine nights they kept me in continual watch,
By turns relieving guards. The fires meanwhile
Burnt constant: one beneath the porch that fac’d
The well-fenc’d court; one in the vestibule
Before my chamber door. The tenth dark night
My chamber’s closely-fitting doors I broke,
And lightly vaulted o’er the court-yard fence,
By guards alike and servant maids unmark’d.
Through all the breadth of Hellas then I fled,
Until at length to Phthia’s fruitful soil,
Mother of flocks, to Peleus’ realm I came,
Who kindly welcom’d me, and with such love
As to his only son, his well-belov’d,
A father shows, his gen’rous gifts bestow’d.
He gave me wealth, he gave me ample rule;
And on the bounds of Phthia bade me dwell,
And o’er the Dolopes hold sov’reign sway.
Thee too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Such, as thou art I made thee; from my soul
I lov’d thee; nor wouldst thou with others go
Or to the meal, or in the house be fed,
Till on my knee thou satt’st, and by my hand
Thy food were cut, the cup were tender’d thee;
And often, in thy childish helplessness.
The bosom of my dress with wine was drench’d;
Such care I had of thee, such pains I took,
Rememb’ring that by Heav’n’s decree, no son
Of mine I e’er might see; then thee I made,
Achilles, rival of the Gods, my son,
That thou mightst be the guardian of mine age.
But thou, Achilles, curb thy noble rage;
A heart implacable beseems thee not.
The Gods themselves, in virtue, honour, strength,
Excelling thee, may yet be mollified;
For they, when mortals have transgress’d, or fail’d
To do aright, by sacrifice and pray’r,
Libations and burnt-off’rings, may be sooth’d.
Pray’rs are the daughters of immortal Jove;
But halt, and wrinkled, and of feeble sight,
They plod in Ate’s track; while Ate, strong
And swift of foot, outstrips their laggard pace,
And, dealing woe to man, o’er all the earth
Before them flies: they, following, heal her wounds.
Him who with honour welcomes their approach,
They greatly aid, and hear him when he prays;
But who rejects, and sternly casts them off,
To Saturn’s son they go, and make their pray’r
That Ate follow him and claim her dues.
Then to the daughters of immortal Jove,
Do thou, Achilles, show the like respect,
That many another brave man’s heart hath sway’d.
If to thy tent no gifts Atrides brought,
With promises of more, but still retain’d
His vehement enmity, I could not ask
That thou thy cherish’d anger shouldst discard,
And aid the Greeks, how great so-e’er their need.
But now large off’rings hath he giv’n, and more
Hath promis’d; and, of all the Greeks, hath sent
To pray thine aid, the men thou lov’st the best.
Discredit not their mission, nor their words.
Till now, I grant thee, none could blame thy wrath.
In praise of men in ancient days renown’d,
This have we heard, that how-so-e’er might rage
Their hostile feuds, their anger might be still
By gifts averted, and by words appeas’d.
One case I bear in mind, in times long past,
And not in later days; and here, ’mid friends,
How all occurr’d, will I at length recite.
Time was, that with Ætolia’s warlike bands
Round Calydon the Acarnanians fought
With mutual slaughter; these to save the town,
The Acarnanians burning to destroy.
This curse of war the golden-throned Queen
Diana sent, in anger that from her
Œneus the first-fruits of his field withheld.
The other Gods their hecatombs receiv’d;
Diana’s shrine alone no off’rings deck’d,
Neglected, or o’erlook’d; the sin was great;
And in her wrath the arrow-darting Queen
A savage wild-boar sent, with gleaming tusks,
Which Œneus’ vineyard haunting, wrought him harm.
There laid he prostrate many a stately tree,
With root and branch, with blossom and with fruit.
Him Meleager, son of Œneus, slew,
With youths and dogs from all the neighbouring towns
Collected; smaller force had not avail’d,
So huge he was, so fierce; and many a youth
Had by his tusks been laid upon the bier.
A fierce contention then the Goddess rais’d,
For the boar’s head and bristly hide, between
The Acarnanian and th’ Ætolian bands.
While warlike Meleager kept the field,
So long the Acarnanians far’d but ill;
Nor dar’d, despite the numbers of their host,
Maintain their ground before the city walls.
When he to anger yielded, which sometimes
Swells in the bosom e’en of wisest men,
Incens’d against his mother, he withdrew
To Cleopatra fair, his wedded wife;
(Marpessa her, Evenus’ daughter, bore
To Idas, strongest man of all who then
Were living, who against Apollo’s self
For the neat-footed maiden bent his bow.
Her parents call’d the child Alcyone,
In mem’ry of the tears her mother shed,
Rival of Alcyon’s melancholy fate,
When by far-darting Phoebus forc’d away).
With her, retiring from the field, he nurs’d
His wrath; resenting thus his mother’s curse,
Althaea; she her brother’s death bore hard,
And pray’d to Heav’n above, and with her hands
Beating the solid earth, the nether pow’rs,
Pluto and awful Proserpine, implor’d,
Down on her knees, her bosom wet with tears,
Death on her son invoking; from the depths
Of Erebus Erinnys heard her pray’r,
Gloom-haunting Goddess, dark and stern of heart.
Soon round the gates the din of battle rose,
The tow’rs by storm assaulted; then his aid
Th’ Ætonian Elders and the sacred priests
With promises of great reward implor’d.
A fruitful plot they bade him set apart,
The richest land in lovely Calydon,
Of fifty acres: half for vineyard meet,
And half of fertile plain, for tillage clear’d.
Upon the threshold of his lofty rooms
Old Œneus stood, and at the portals clos’d
He knock’d in vain, a suppliant to his son.
His sisters and his brother join’d their pray’rs,
But sterner his rejection of their suit;
The friends he valued most, and lov’d the best,
Yet they too fail’d his fix’d resolve to shake;
Till to his very doors the war had reach’d,
The foe upon the tow’rs, the town in flames:
Then Meleager’s beauteous wife, at length,
In tears, beseeching him, the thousand ills
Recall’d, which on a captur’d town attend;
The slaughter’d men, the city burnt with fire,
The helpless children and deep-bosom’d dames
A prey to strangers. List’ning to the tale,
His spirit was rous’d within him; and again
He took the field, and donn’d his glitt’ring arms.
Thus did his act from doom th’ Ætolians save
Spontaneous; yet he gain’d not, though he sav’d,
The rich reward they once were pledg’d to give.
But be not thou like him, nor let thy God
Turn thitherward thy thoughts; our ships on fire,
Thine aid will less be priz’d; come, take the gifts,
And as a God be honour’d by the Greeks.
If thou hereafter, unsolicited,
The battle join, the Greeks thou mayst protect,
But not an equal share of honour gain.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Phoenix, my second father, rev’rend sire,
Such honours move me not; my honour comes
From Jove, whose will it is that I should here
Remain beside the ships, while I retain
Breath in my lungs and vigour in my limbs.
This too I say, and bear it in thy mind:
Disturb me not with weeping and complaints,
To do Atrides grace; if him thou love,
My love for thee perchance may turn to hate:
My friend should honour him who honours me.
But come with me, and of my kingdom half,
And equal honours shalt thou share with me.
These shall our message bear; stay thou the while,
And on soft couch repose; to-morrow morn
Will we determine or to sail or stay.”

He said, and with his eyebrows gave a sign
In silence to Patroclus, to prepare
A bed for Phoenix, that without delay
The rest might leave the tent; then thus began
Ajax, the godlike son of Telamon:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ high-born son,
Depart we now; for this way our discourse
Can lead to no result; behoves us bear
Our tidings, all unwelcome as they are,
Back to the chiefs awaiting our return.
Achilles hath allow’d his noble heart
To cherish rancour and malignant hate;
Nor reeks he of his old companions’ love,
Wherewith we honour’d him above the rest.
Relentless he! a son’s or brother’s death,
By payment of a fine, may be aton’d;
The slayer may remain in peace at home,
The debt discharg’d; the other will forego,
The forfeiture receiv’d, his just revenge;
But thou maintain’st a stern, obdurate mood.
And for a single girl! we offer sev’n,
Surpassing fair, and other gifts to boot.
We now bespeak thy courtesy; respect
Thy hearth; remember that beneath thy roof
We stand, deputed by the gen’ral voice
Of all the host; and fain would claim to be,
Of all the Greeks, thy best and dearest friends.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon,
Without offence hast thou thy message giv’n;
But fury fills my soul, whene’er I think
How Agamemnon, ’mid th’ assembled Greeks,
Insulting, held me forth to public scorn,
As some dishonour’d, houseless vagabond.
But go ye now, and bear my answer back:
No more in bloody war will I engage,
Till noble Hector, Priam’s godlike son,
O’er slaughter’d Greeks, your ships enwrapp’d in fire,
Shall reach the quarters of the Myrmidons.
Ere he assail my ship and tents, I think
That Hector, valiant as he is, will pause.”
Thus he: they each the double goblet rais’d,
And, to the Gods their due libations pour’d,
Ulysses leading, to the ships return’d.

Meanwhile Patroclus bade th’ attendant maids
Prepare a bed for Phoenix; they obey’d,
And quickly laid the bed with fleeces warm,
And rugs, and linen light and fine o’erspread.
There slept th’ old man, and waited for the morn.
Within the tent’s recess Achilles slept;
And by his side, from Lesbos captive brought,
Daughter of Phorbas, Diomede fair;
On th’ other side Patroclus lay; with him
The graceful Iphis, whom, when Scyros’ isle
He captur’d, and Enyes’ rock-built fort,
Achilles to his lov’d companion gave.

When to Atrides’ tent the envoys came,
The chiefs, uprising, pledg’d them one by one
In golden goblets; then their tidings ask’d.
First Agamemnon, King of men, enquir’d:
“Tell me, renown’d Ulysses, pride of Greece,
What says he: will he save our ships from fire,
Or still, in wrathful mood, withhold his aid?”

To whom again Ulysses, stout of heart:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
His anger is not quench’d, but fiercer still
It glows; thy gifts and thee alike he spurns;
He bids thee with the other chiefs concert
The means thy people and thy ships to save;
And menaces himself at early dawn
To launch his well-trimm’d vessels on the main.
Nay more, he counsels others, so he says,
Homeward to turn, since here of lofty Troy
We see not yet the end; all-seeing Jove
O’er her extends his hand; on him relying,
Her people all with confidence are fill’d.
Such was his language; here before you stand
Ajax and both the heralds, sage, grave men,
Who with me went, and will confirm my words.
Old Phoenix left we there, so will’d the chief,
That with the morrow he with him may sail,
And seek their native land, if so he will;
For not by force will he remove him hence.”

Ulysses thus; they all in silence heard,
Amaz’d, so stern the message that he bore.
Long time in silence sat the chiefs of Greece.
Outspoke at length the valiant Diomed:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Would that thou ne’er hadst stoop’d with costly gifts
To sue for aid from Peleus’ matchless son;
For he before was over-proud, and now
Thine offers will have tenfold swoll’n his pride.
But leave we him, according to his will,
To go or stay: he then will join the fight,
When his own spirit shall prompt, or Heav’n inspire.
But hear ye all, and do as I advise:
Refresh’d with food and wine (for therein lie
Both strength and courage), turn we to our rest;
And when the rosy-finger’d morn appears,
Thyself among the foremost, with bold hearts,
Before our ships both horse and foot array.”

He said; and all the chiefs with loud applause
His speech confirm’d; then, due libations pour’d,
Each to his sev’ral tent they all withdrew;
Then laid them down, and sought the boon of sleep.



ARGUMENT.

THE NIGHT ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.


Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses,
and Diomed, are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call
a council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemy’s camp,
to learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed
undertakes the hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for
his companion. In their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had
sent on a like design to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are
informed of the situation of the Trojans and auxiliary forces, and
particularly of Rhesus, and the Thracians, who were lately arrived.
They pass on with success; kill Rhesus with several of his officers,
and seize the famous horses of that prince, with which they return in
triumph to the camp.

The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps.

BOOK X.

In night-long slumbers lay the other chiefs
Of all the Greeks, by gentle sleep subdued;
But not on Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
By various cares oppress’d, sweet slumber fell.
As when from Jove, the fair-hair’d Juno’s Lord,
Flashes the lightning, bringing in its train
Tempestuous storm of mingled rain and hail
Or snow, by winter sprinkled o’er the fields;
Or op’ning wide the rav’nous jaws of war;
So Agamemnon from his inmost heart
Pour’d forth in groans his multitudinous grief,
His spirit within him sinking. On the plain
He look’d, and there, alarm’d, the watchfires saw,
Which, far advanc’d before the walls of Troy,
Blaz’d numberless; and thence of pipes and flutes
He heard the sound, and busy hum of men.
Upon the ships he look’d, and men of Greece,
And by the roots his hair in handfuls tore
To Jove on high; deep groan’d his mighty heart.
Thus as he mus’d, the wisest course appear’d,
With Nestor, son of Neleus, to confer,
If they some scheme in council might devise
To ward destruction from the Grecian host.
He rose, and o’er his body drew his vest,
And underneath his well-turn’d feet he bound
His sandals fair; then o’er his shoulders threw,
Down reaching to his feet, a lion’s skin,
Tawny and vast; then grasp’d his pond’rous spear.

On Menelaus weigh’d an equal dread;
Nor on his eyes that night had slumber sat,
Lest ill befall the Greeks; who, in his cause,
Crossing the wat’ry waste, had come to Troy,
And bold defiance to the Trojans giv’n.
Round his broad chest a panther’s skin he threw;
Then on his head his brazen helmet plac’d,
And in his brawny hand a lance he bore.
To meet his brother went he forth, of Greece
The mighty monarch, as a God rever’d.
Him by the ship he found, in act to arm;
And welcome was his presence to the King.

Then valiant Menelaus first began:
“Why thus in arms, good brother? seek’st thou one
The Trojan camp to spy? I greatly fear
That none will undertake the task, alone
To spy the movements of the hostile camp
In the dark night: stout-hearted he must be.”

To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:
“Great need, my noble brother, have we both
Of sagest counsels, if we hope the Greeks
And Grecian ships from ruin to preserve,
Since turn’d against us is the mind of Jove.
To Hector’s off’rings most his soul inclines;
For never have I seen, or heard men tell,
How in one day one man has wrought such loss
As Hector, dear to Jove, yet not the son
Of God or Goddess, on the Greeks has wrought.
Such deeds hath he achiev’d, such havoc made,
As we shall long in bitter mem’ry keep.
Haste thou amid the ships, and hither bring
Idomeneus and Ajax; I the while
Will Nestor rouse, and urge that he with us
The outposts visit, and instruct the guard.
To him they best will listen; for his son
Commands the watch; with him Meriones,
The follower of the King Idomeneus:
To them by pref’rence hath this charge been giv’n.”

He said: and Menelaus answer’d thus:
“What wouldst thou have me do then? here remain
With them, and wait thy coming, or to them
Thy message give, and follow in thy steps?”

Him answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Remain thou here, lest haply we might fail
To meet; for in the camp are many paths.
But thou, where’er thou go’st, each sev’ral man
Address, and ask to rise; to each his name
And patronymic giving; pay to each
All due respect; nor bear thee haughtily;
We like the rest must share the load of toil.
Which Jove assigns to all of mortal birth.”

His brother thus with counsels wise dismiss’d,
The King to aged Nestor took his way:
Him by his tent and dark-ribb’d ship he found
On a soft couch; beside him lay his arms,
His shield, two lances, and a glitt’ring helm:
There lay the rich-wrought belt the old man wore,
When to the battle, arm’d, he led his troops;
For nought to age’s weakness would he yield.
Raising his head, and on his elbow propp’d,
He question’d thus Atrides: “Who art thou,
That wand’rest through th’ encampment thus alone,
In the dark night, when other mortals sleep?
Seek’st thou some mule broke loose, or comrade lost?
Speak, nor in silence come; what wouldst thou here?”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“O Nestor! son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Know me for Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
On whom hath Jove, beyond the lot of men,
Laid grief that ne’er shall end, while I retain
Breath in my lungs, and vigour in my limbs.
I wander thus, because these eyes of mine
Sweet slumber visits not, by cares of war
Oppress’d, and harass’d by the woes of Greece.
Much for the Greeks I fear; nor keeps my mind
Its wonted firmess; I am ill at ease;
And leaps my troubled heart as tho’ ’twould burst
My bosom’s bounds; my limbs beneath me shake.
But if thou wilt, since thou too know’st not sleep,
Together to the outposts let us go,
And see if there, by toil and sleep o’erpow’r’d,
The guard repose, neglectful of their watch.
The foe is close at hand; nor are we sure
He may not hazard e’en a night attack.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied;
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
Not all the hopes that Hector entertains
Shall by the Lord of counsel be fulfill’d;
For him are toil and danger yet in store,
If but Achilles of his wrath repent.
Gladly will I attend thee; others too,
Tydides, spearman bold, Ulysses sage,
Ajax the swift, and Phyleus’ noble son,
Should all be summon’d; and ’twere well that one
Across the camp should run, to call in haste
The godlike Ajax, and Idomeneus;
Theirs are the farthest ships, nor near at hand.
But, dear to me as Menelaus is,
And highly honour’d, I must blame, that thus
(Though thou shouldst take offence, I needs must say)
He sleeps, and leaves the toil to thee alone.
With all the chiefs he should be busied now,
Imploring aid, in this our utmost need.”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“For other times, old man, reserve thy blame;
Sometimes, I own, he lags behind, nor takes
His share of labour; not from indolence,
Or want of sense; but still regarding me;
Waiting from me an impulse to receive.
But now, before me he was up, and came
To visit me; and I have sent him on
To call those very men whom thou hast nam’d.
Come then; for we, beside the gates, and guard
Shall find them; there my orders were to meet.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied;
“Then none can blame him; nor can any Greek
Justly refuse his summons to obey.”

He said, and round his body wrapped his vest;
Then on his feet his sandals fair he bound,
And o’er his shoulders clasp’d a purple cloak,
Doubled, with ample folds, and downy pile;
Then took his spear, with point of sharpen’d brass,
And through the camp prepar’d to take his way.
Gerenian Nestor from his slumbers first
Ulysses, sage as Jove in council, rous’d,
Loud shouting; soon the voice his senses reach’d;
Forth from his tent he came, and thus he spoke:
“What cause so urgent leads you, through the camp,
In the dark night to wander thus alone?”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Be not offended; such the stress that now
Weighs down our army; come thou then with us,
And others let us call; with whom ’tis meet
That we should counsel take, to fight or fly.”

He said; Ulysses to the tent return’d;
Then, his broad shield across his shoulders thrown,
Came forth again, and with them took his way.
To Diomed, the son of Tydeus, next
They went; and him they found beside his arms,
Without his tent; his comrades slept around,
Their heads upon their bucklers laid; their spears
Stood upright, on the butts; the burnish’d brass
Like Heav’n’s own lightning, flashing far around.
Stretch’d on a wild bull’s hide the chief repos’d,
A gay-wrought carpet roll’d beneath his head.
Gerenian Nestor close behind him stood,
And touched him with his foot, and thus in tone
Reproachful spoke: “Arouse thee, Tydeus’ son!
Why sleep’st thou thus all night? or know’st thou not
That on the very margin of the plain,
And close beside the ships the Trojans lie,
And little space between the camps is left?”

Quick rous’d from sleep, thus answer’d Diomed:
“Beshrew thy heart, old man! no labour seems
For thee too hard; are there not younger men
To run about the camp, and summon all
The sev’ral chiefs? thou dost too much, old man.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“True, friend, and full of wisdom are thy words;
Good sons indeed I have, and followers brave
And many, who might well my message bear;
But great is now the stress that lies on Greece;
For on a razor’s edge is balanc’d now,
To all the Greeks, the chance of life or death.
Do thou then go (for thou my younger art),
And if thou pity me, thyself arouse
Ajax the swift, and Phyleus’ noble son.”
He said; the warrior round his shoulders threw,
Down reaching to his feet, a lion’s hide,
Tawny and dark; and took his pond’rous spear.
He went, arous’d, and with him brought the chiefs.

When to the guard they came, not sunk in sleep
Found they the leaders; but on wakeful watch
Intent, and all alert beside their arms.
As round a sheepfold keep their anxious watch
The dogs, who in the neighbouring thicket hear
Some beast, that, bold in search of prey, has come
Down from the mountain; loud the clamours rise
Of men and dogs; all sleep is banish’d thence;
So from their eyes was banish’d sleep, who watch’d
Through that disastrous night; still plainward turning
At ev’ry movement in the Trojan camp.
The old man saw, well-pleas’d; and thus address’d
With cheering words the captains of the guard:
“Watch ever thus, good youths; nor be surpris’d
By slumber, lest the foe a triumph gain.”

This said, he cross’d the ditch, and with him went
The Grecian leaders, to the council call’d:
With them, admitted to the conf’rence, went
Meriones, and Nestor’s noble son.
The deep-dug ditch they cross’d, and sat them down
Upon an open space, from corpses clear;
Where Hector from the slaughter of the Greeks
Turn’d back, when Ev’ning spread her veil around:
There sat they down, and there the conf’rence held.
Gerenian Nestor first took up the word:
“O friends! is any here with heart so bold
Who dares, self-confident, the Trojan camp
To enter? there some straggler he might take,
Or in the camp itself some tidings gain,
What are their secret counsels; if they mean
Here by the ships to hold their ground, or back,
Sated with vict’ry, to the town retire.
This could he learn, and hither scatheless bring
His tidings, high as Heav’n in all men’s mouths
Would be his praise, and ample his reward.
For ev’ry captain of a ship should give
A coal-black ewe, and at her foot a lamb,
A prize beyond compare; and high should be
His place at banquets and at solemn feasts.”

He said; but all the chiefs in silence heard;
Then rose the valiant Diomed, and said:
“Nestor, that heart is mine; I dare alone
Enter the hostile camp, so close at hand;
Yet were one comrade giv’n me, I should go
With more of comfort, more of confidence.
Where two combine, one before other sees
The better course; and ev’n though one alone
The readiest way discover, yet would be
His judgment slower, his decision less.”

He said, and many chiefs to Diomed
Proffer’d companionship; stood forth at once,
With him to penetrate the Trojan camp,
The two Ajaces, ministers of Mars;
Stood forth Meriones, and eagerly
Stood forth the son of Nestor; Atreus’ son,
The royal Menelaus, spearman bold,
And stout Ulysses, whose enduring heart
For ev’ry deed of valour was prepar’d.
Rose Agamemnon, King of men, and said:
“Tydides, comrade dearest to my soul,
Choose thou thine own companion, whom thou wilt;
Of all the many here that proffer aid
Him whom thou deem’st the best; nor from respect
To persons leave the better man behind,
And take the worse; nor def’rence show to rank,
Not though the purest royal blood were his.”

In fear for Menelaus thus he spoke:
Then answer’d valiant Diomed, and said;
“If my companion I may freely choose,
How can I pass the sage Ulysses by?
Of ready wit, and dauntless courage, prov’d
In ev’ry danger; and to Pallas dear.
I should not fear, by him accompanied,
To pass through fire, and safely both return;
So far in prudence he surpasses all.”

Whom answer’d thus Ulysses, stout of heart:
“Tydides, nor exaggerated praise
Bestow on me, nor censure; for thou speak’st
To those who know me all for what I am.
But go we; night wanes fast, the morn is near:
The stars are high in Heav’n; and of the night
Two thirds are spent, one third alone remains.”

He said; and both prepar’d to don their arms.
The youthful warrior Thrasymedes gave
To Diomed a two-edg’d sword (his own
Had in the ship been left) and ample shield;
Then on his brows a leathern headpiece plac’d,
Without or peak or plume; a simple casque,
Such as is worn by youths to guard their head.
A bow, and well-fill’d quiver, and a sword,
Meriones to sage Ulysses gave;
And on his brows a leathern headpiece plac’d,
Well wrought within, with num’rous straps secur’d,
And on th’ outside, with wild boars’ gleaming tusks
Profusely garnish’d, scatter’d here and there
By skilful hand; the midst with felt was lin’d;
This from Amyntor, son of Ormenus,
Autolycus from Eleon bore away,
Spoil of his pillag’d house; Autolycus
Gave to Amphidamas, Cytheran chief,
Who in Scandea dwelt; Amphidamas
To Molus, pledge of friendship; he again
Gave to his son, Meriones, from whom
It now encircled sage Ulysses’ brow.
Thus with accoutrements and arms supplied,
They left their brother chiefs, and took their way.
Then close beside their path, by Pallas sent,
Rose, on the right, a heron; through the gloom
They saw it not indeed, but heard the cry.
The fav’ring sign with joy Ulysses hail’d,
And thus to Pallas pray’d: “Hear me, thou child
Of aegis-bearing Jove, who still hast stood
In ev’ry peril at my side, whose eye
My ev’ry movement sees; now, Goddess, now
Befriend me; grant that safe, with triumph crown’d,
We may return, some great exploit achiev’d,
Such as the Trojans long may bear in mind.”

Him following, thus the brave Tydides pray’d:
“My voice too, child of Jove, undaunted, hear;
And be with me, as with my father erst,
The godlike Tydeus, when to Thebes he went,
An envoy, in advance; and left behind,
Upon Asopus’ banks the mail-clad Greeks.
Smooth was the message which to Thebes he bore;
But great, his mission ended, were the deeds
That with thine aid he wrought; for, Goddess, thou
Wast with him, and thine arm was his defence:
So be thou now with me, and me defend.
Then on thine altar will I sacrifice
A yearling heifer, broad of brow, untam’d,
Whereon no yoke hath mortal ever laid:
Her will I give, and tip her horns with gold.”

Thus as they pray’d, their pray’r the Goddess heard;
Then, their devotions ended, on they far’d
Through the deep dead of night, like lions twain,
’Mid slaughter, corpses, arms, and blacken’d gore.

Nor, in the Trojan camp, did Hector leave
The chiefs to rest; but all to conf’rence call’d,
The leaders and the councillors of Troy;
To whom his prudent speech he thus address’d:
“Who is there here, that for a rich reward
A noble work will undertake? A car
And two strong-collar’d horses, best of all
That can be found within the Grecian lines,
Shall he receive, who, to his endless praise,
Shall dare approach the ships; and learn if still
They keep their wonted watch, or, by our arms
Subdued and vanquished, meditate retreat,
And, worn with toil, the nightly watch neglect.”
Thus Hector spoke; but all in silence heard.

There was one Dolon in the Trojan camp,
The herald’s son, Eumedes; rich in gold
And brass; not fair of face, but swift of foot;
Amid five sisters he the only son;
Who thus to Hector and the Trojans spoke:

“Hector, with dauntless courage I will dare
Approach the ships, and bring thee tidings sure;
But hold thou forth thy royal staff, and swear
That I the horses and the brass-bound car
Shall have, the boast of Peleus’ matchless son:
Not vain shall be my errand, nor deceive
Thy hopes; right through the camp I mean to pass
To Agamemnon’s tent, where all the chiefs
Debate in council, or to fight or fly.”

He said; and Hector took his royal staff,
And swore to him: “Be witness Jove himself,
The Lord of thunder, that no Trojan man,
Thyself except, shall e’er those horses drive;
For thee they are reserv’d, a glorious prize.”

Thus Hector swore; though unfulfill’d the oath.
The hope to Dolon fresh assurance gave.
Forthwith, his bow across his shoulders slung,
A grisly wolf-skin o’er it, on his head
A cap of marten’s fur, and in his hand
A jav’lin, from the camp he took his way,
Straight to the Grecian ships; but never thence
Destin’d to bring th’ expected tidings back.

The crowd of men and horses left behind,
Briskly he mov’d along; Ulysses first
Mark’d his approach, and to Tydides said:
“See, from the camp where some one this way comes,
With what intent I know not; if to play
The spy about the ships, or rob the dead.
Turn we aside, and let him pass us by
A little way; we then with sudden rush
May seize him; or if he outstrip us both
By speed of foot, may urge him tow’rd the ships,
Driving him still before us with our spears,
And from, the city cutting off his flight.”
Thus saying, ’mid the dead, beside the road
They crouch’d; he, all unconscious, hasten’d by.
But when such space was interpos’d as leave
Between the sluggish oxen and themselves[3]
A team of mules (so much the faster they
Through the stiff fallow drag the jointed plough),
They rush’d upon him; at the sound he stopp’d,
Deeming that from the Trojan camp they came,
By Hector sent, to order his return.
Within a spear’s length when they came, or less,
For foes he knew them, and to night address’d
His active limbs; they rush’d in hot pursuit.
And as two hounds, well practis’d in the chase,
With glist’ning fangs, unflagging, strain to catch,
In woodland glade, some pricket deer, or hare,
That flies before them, screaming; so those two,
Tydides and Ulysses, stout of heart,
With fiery zeal, unflagging, strain’d to catch
The flying Dolon, from the camp cut off;
But when the fugitive approach’d the ships,
Close by the guard, fresh vigour Pallas gave
To Diomed, lest haply from the walls
Some other might anticipate his blow,
And he himself but second honours gain.
Tydides then with threat’ning gesture cried,
“Stop, or I hurl my spear; and small thy chance,
If I assail thee, of escape from death.”
He said, and threw his spear; but by design
It struck him not; above his shoulder flew
The polish’d lance, and quiver’d in the ground.
Sudden he stopp’d, with panic paralys’d:
His teeth all chatt’ring, pale with fear he stood,
With falt’ring accents; panting, they came up
And seiz’d him in their grasp; he thus, in tears:
“Spare but my life; my life I can redeem;
For ample stores I have of gold, and brass,
And well-wrought iron; and of these my sire
Would pay a gen’rous ransom, could he learn
That in the Grecian ships I yet surviv’d.”

To whom Ulysses, deep-designing, thus:
“Be of good cheer; nor let the fear of death
Disturb thy mind; but tell me truly this;
How is ’t that tow’rd the ships thou com’st alone,
In the still night, when other mortals sleep?
Com’st thou perchance for plunder of the dead?
Or seek’st upon our ships to play the spy,
By Hector sent? or of thine own accord?”

Then Dolon thus—his knees with terror shook—
“With much persuasion, of my better mind
Hector beguil’d me, off’ring as my prize
Achilles’ horses and his brass-bound car;
Through the dark night he sent me, and enjoin’d,
Ent’ring your hostile camp, to learn if still
Ye keep your wonted watch, or by our arms
Subdued and vanquish’d, meditate retreat,
And worn with toil, your nightly watch neglect.”

To whom Ulysses thus with scornful smile:
“High soar’d thy hopes indeed, that thought to win
The horses of Achilles; hard are they
For mortal man to harness or control,
Save for Achilles’ self, the Goddess-born.
But tell me truly this; when here thou cam’st,
Where left’st thou Hector, guardian chief of Troy?
Where are his warlike arms? his horses where?
Where lie the rest? and where are plac’d their guards?
What are their secret counsels? do they mean
Here by the ships to keep their ground, or back,
Sated with vict’ry, to the town return?”

Whom Dolon answer’d thus, Eumedes’ son:
“Thy questions all true answers shall receive;
Hector, with those who share his counsels, sits
In conf’rence, far apart, near Ilus’ tomb;
But for the guards thou speak’st of, noble chief,
Not one is station’d to protect the camp.
Around the Trojan fires indeed, perforce,
A watch is kept; and they, among themselves,
Due caution exercise: but, for th’ Allies,
They sleep, and to the Trojans leave the watch,
Since nor their children nor their wives are near.”

To whom in answer sage Ulysses thus:
“Say now, where sleep they? with the Trojans mix’d,
Or separate? explain, that I may know.”

Whom answer’d Dolon thus, Eumedes’ son:
“To this too will I give ye answer true;
Next to the sea the Carian forces lie;
The Paeon archers and the Leleges,
The Caucons, and the bold Pelasgians next;
On Thymbra’s side the Lycians’ lot has fall’n,
The Mysians brave, the Phrygian cavalry,
And the Maeonians with their horsehair plumes.
But why of these enquire? if ye intend
An inroad on the camp, apart from all,
New come, the farthest off, the Thracians lie:
Rhesus their King, the son of Eioneus,
Sleeps in the midst; no steeds that e’er I saw
For size and beauty can with his compare:
Whiter than snow, and swifter than the wind.
With gold and silver is his chariot wrought,
His armour golden, of gigantic size,
A marvel to behold! it seems not meet
For mortal man, but for th’ immortal Gods.
But take me now in safety to the ships;
Or leave me here in fetters bound, that so,
Ere ye return, ye may approve my words,
And see if I have told you true, or no.”

To whom thus Diomed with stern regard:
“Dolon, though good thy tidings, hope not thou,
Once in our hands, to ’scape the doom of death;
For if we now should let thee go, again
In after times thou mightst our ships approach,
As secret spy, or open enemy:
But if beneath my hands thou lose thy life,
No farther trouble shalt thou cause the Greeks.”
He said; and as the suppliant sought in vain
To touch his beard, imploring, through his throat,
Both tendons sev’ring, drove his trenchant blade:
Ev’n while he spoke, his head was roll’d in dust.
The cap of marten fur from off his head
They took, the wolf-skin, and the bow unstrung,
And jav’lin; these Ulysses held aloft,
And thus to Pallas pray’d, who gave the spoil:
“Receive, great Goddess, these our gifts; to thee,
Of all th’ Immortals on Olympus’ height,
Our off’rings first we give; conduct us now,
The Thracian camp and Thracian steeds to gain.”

Thus as he spoke, amid the tamarisk scrub
Far off he threw the trophies; then with reeds,
And twigs new broken from the tamarisk boughs,
He set a mark, lest in the gloom of night
Returning, they might haply miss the spot.
Then on they pass’d thro’ arms and blacken’d gore,
And reach’d the confines of the Thracian camp.
There found they all by sleep subdued; their arms
Beside them on the ground, in order due,
In triple rows; and by the side of each,
Harness’d and yok’d, his horses ready stood.
Surrounded by his warriors, Rhesus slept;
Beside him stood his coursers fleet, their reins
Suspended to the chariot’s topmost rail:
Ulysses mark’d him as he lay, and said,
“This is the man, Tydides, these the steeds,
To us by Dolon, whom we slew, describ’d.
Now then, put forth thy might; beseems it not
To stand thus idly with thine arms in hand:
Loose thou the horses; or do thou the men
Despatch, and to my care the horses leave.”

He said: and Pallas vigour new inspir’d,
That right and left he smote; dire were the groans
Of slaughter’d men; the earth was red with blood;
And as a lion on th’ untended flock
Of sheep or goats with savage onslaught springs,
Ev’n so Tydides on the Thracians sprang,
Till twelve were slain; and as Tydides’ sword
Gave each to death, Ulysses by the feet
Drew each aside; reflecting, that perchance
The horses, startled, might refuse to pass
The corpses; for as yet they knew them not.
But when Tydides saw the sleeping King,
A thirteenth victim to his sword was giv’n,
Painfully breathing; for by Pallas’ art,
He saw that night, as in an evil dream,
The son of Œneus standing o’er his head.
Meanwhile Ulysses sage the horses loos’d;
He gather’d up the reins, and with his bow
(For whip was none at hand) he drove them forth;
Then softly whistling to Tydides gave
A signal; he, the while, remain’d behind,
Musing what bolder deed he yet might do;
Whether the seat, whereon the arms were laid,
To draw away, or, lifted high in air,
To bear it off in triumph on the car;
Or on the Thracians farther loss inflict;
But while he mus’d, beside him Pallas stood,
And said, “Bethink thee, Tydeus’ son, betimes
Of thy return, lest, if some other God
Should wake the Trojans, thou shouldst need to fly.”

She said; the heav’nly voice he recogniz’d,
And mounted straight the car; Ulysses touch’d
The horses with his bow; and, urg’d to speed,
They tow’rd the ships their rapid course pursued.

Nor idle watch Apollo kept, who saw
Tydides o’er the plain by Pallas led;
With anger fill’d, the Trojan camp he sought;
And Rhesus’ kinsman, good Hippocoon,
The Thracian councillor, from sleep arous’d;
Awaking, when the vacant space he view’d,
Where late had stood the horses; and his friends
Gasping in death, and welt’ring in their blood,
He groan’d as on his comrade’s name he call’d:
Then loud the clamour rose, and wild uproar,
Unspeakable, of Trojans thronging round;
They marvell’d at the deeds; but marvell’d more
How they who wrought them had escap’d unscath’d.

Meantime arriv’d where Hector’s scout they slew,
Ulysses, lov’d of Heav’n, a moment check’d
His eager steeds; Tydides from the car
Leap’d to the ground, and in Ulysses’ hand
The bloody trophies plac’d; then mounted quick,
And tow’rd the ships, their destin’d goal, urg’d on
The fiery horses; nothing loth, they flew.
Nestor first heard the sound, and cried, “O friends,
The leaders and the councillors of Greece,
Am I deceiv’d, or is it true? methinks
The sound of horses, hurrying, strikes mine ear;
Grant Heav’n, Ulysses and brave Diomed
May bring those horses from the Trojan camp;
Yet much I fear our bravest may have met
With some disaster ’mid the crowd of foes.”

He scarce had ended, when themselves appear’d,
And from the car descended: welcom’d back
With cordial grasp of hands, and friendly words.
Gerenian Nestor first, enquiring, said:
“Tell me, renown’d Ulysses, pride of Greece,
Whence come these horses? from the Trojan camp?
Or hath some God, that met you by the way,
Bestow’d them, radiant as the beams of light?
Among the Trojans day by day I move;
’Tis not my wont; old warrior though I be,
To lag behind; but horses such as these
I never saw; some God hath giv’n them, sure;
For Jove, the Cloud-compeller, loves you both,
And Pallas, child of aegis-bearing Jove.”

To whom again the sage Ulysses thus:
“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Had they so will’d, the Gods, so great their pow’r,
E’en better horses could have giv’n than these;
But these, old man, are Thracians, newly come;
Whose King the valiant Diomed hath slain,
And with him twelve, the best of all his band.
A scout too have we slain, by Hector sent,
And by the Trojan chiefs, to spy our camp.”

He said, and o’er the ditch the horses drove,
Exulting in their prize; and with him went
The other chiefs, rejoicing, through the camp.
Arriv’d at Diomed’s well-order’d tent,
First with strong halters to the rack, where stood,
High-fed with corn, his own swift-footed steeds,
The horses they secur’d; Ulysses then
The bloody spoils of Dolon stow’d away
In the ship’s stern, till fitting sacrifice
To Pallas might be offer’d; to the sea
Descending then, they wash’d away the sweat,
Which on their necks, and thighs, and knees had dried;
The sweat wash’d off, and in the ocean waves
Themselves refresh’d, they sought the polish’d bath;
Then, by the bath restor’d, and all their limbs
Anointed freely with the lissom oil,
Sat down to breakfast; and from flowing bowls
In Pallas’ honour pour’d the luscious wine.



ARGUMENT.

THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON.


Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector
prepares the Trojans to receive them; while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva,
give the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him; and Hector is
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the
engagement, till the king should be wounded, and retire from the field.
He then makes a great slaughter of the enemy; Ulysses and Diomed put a
stop to him for a time; but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is
obliged to desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans,
wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him.
Hector comes against Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes and
rallies the Greeks. In the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the
army, is pierced with an arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in
Nestor’s chariot. Achilles (who overlooked the action from his ship)
sends Patroclus to inquire which of the Greeks was wounded in that
manner. Nestor entertains him in his tent with an account of the
accidents of the day, and a long recital of some former wars which he
had remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon persuading Achilles to
fight for his countrymen, or at least to permit him to do it clad in
Achilles’ armour. Patroclus in his return meets Eurypylus also wounded,
and assists in that distress.

This book opens with the eight-and-twentieth day of the poem; and the
same day, with its various actions and adventures, is extended through
the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth,
and part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the
monument of Ilus.

BOOK XI.

Now rose Aurora from Tithonus’ bed,
To mortals and Immortals bringing light;
When to the ships of Greece came Discord down,
Despatch’d from Jove, with dire portents of war.
Upon Ulysses’ lofty ship she stood,
The midmost, thence to shout to either side,
Or to the tents of Ajax Telamon,
Or of Achilles, who at each extreme,
Confiding in their strength, had moor’d their ships.
There stood the Goddess, and in accents loud
And dread she call’d, and fix’d in ev’ry breast
The fierce resolve to wage unwearied war;
And dearer to their hearts than thoughts of home
Or wish’d return, became the battle-field.

Atrides, loudly shouting, call’d the Greeks
To arms: himself his flashing armour donn’d.
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
A breastplate guarded, giv’n by Cinyras
In pledge of friendship; for in Cyprus’ isle
He heard the rumour of the glorious fleet
About to sail for Troy; and sought with gifts
To win the favour of the mighty King.
Ten bands were there inwrought of dusky bronze,
Twelve of pure gold, twice ten of shining tin:
Of bronze six dragons upwards tow’rds the neck
Their length extended, three on either side:
In colour like the bow, which Saturn’s son
Plac’d in the clouds, a sign to mortal men:
Then o’er his shoulder threw his sword; bright flash’d
The golden studs; the silver scabbard shone,
With golden baldrick fitted; next his shield
He took, full-siz’d, well-wrought, well-prov’d in fight;
Around it ran ten circling rims of brass;
With twenty bosses round of burnish’d tin,
And, in the centre, one of dusky bronze.
A Gorgon’s head, with aspect terrible,
Was wrought, with Fear and Flight encircled round:
Depending from a silver belt it hung;
And on the belt a dragon, wrought in bronze,
Twin’d his lithe folds, and turn’d on ev’ry side,
Sprung from a single neck, his triple head.
Then on his brow his lofty helm he plac’d,
Four-crested, double-peak’d, with horsehair plumes,
That nodded,-fearful, from the warrior’s head.
Then took two weighty lances, tipp’d with brass,
Which fiercely flash’d against the face of Heav’n:
Pallas and Juno thund’ring from on high
In honour of Mycenæ’s wealthy lord.

Forthwith they order’d, each his charioteer,
To stay his car beside the ditch; themselves,
On foot, in arms accoutred, sallied forth,
And loud, ere early dawn, the clamour rose.
Advanc’d before the cars, they lin’d the ditch;
Follow’d the cars, a little space between:
But Jove with dire confusion fill’d their ranks,
Who sent from Heav’n a show’r of blood-stain’d rain.
In sign of many a warrior’s coming doom,
Soon to the viewless shades untimely sent.
Meanwhile upon the slope, beneath the plain,
The Trojan chiefs were gather’d; Hector’s self,
Polydamas, Æneas, as a God
In rev’rence held; Antenor’s three brave sons,
Agenor’s godlike presence, Polybus,
And, heav’nly fair, the youthful Acamas.
In front was seen the broad circumference
Of Hector’s shield; and as amid the clouds
Shines forth the fiery dog-star, bright and clear,
Anon beneath the cloudy veil conceal’d;
So now in front was Hector seen, and now
Pass’d to the rear, exhorting; all in brass,
His burnish’d arms like Jove’s own lightning flash’d.

As in the corn-land of some wealthy Lord
The rival bands of reapers mow the swathe,
Barley or wheat; and fast the trusses fall;
So Greeks and Trojans mow’d th’ opposing ranks;
Nor these admitted thought of faint retreat,
But still made even head; while those, like wolves,
Rush’d to the onset; Discord, Goddess dire,
Beheld, rejoicing; of the heav’nly pow’rs
She only mingled with the combatants;
The others all were absent; they, serene,
Repos’d in gorgeous palaces, for each
Amid Olympus’ deep recesses built.
Yet all the cloud-girt son of Saturn blam’d,
Who will’d the vict’ry to the arms of Troy.
He heeded not their anger; but withdrawn
Apart from all, in pride of conscious strength,
Survey’d the walls of Troy, the ships of Greece,
The flash of arms, the slayers and the slain.

While yet ’twas morn, and wax’d the youthful day,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side: but when the hour was come
When woodmen, in the forest’s deep recess,
Prepare their food, and wearied with the toil
Of felling loftiest trees, with aching arms
Turn with keen relish to their midday meal;
Then Grecian valour broke th’ opposing ranks,
As each along the line encourag’d each;
First sprang the monarch Agamemnon forth,
And brave Bienor slew, his people’s guard;
And, with the chief, his friend and charioteer,
Oileus; he, down-leaping from the car,
Stood forth defiant; but between his brows
The monarch’s spear was thrust; nor aught avail’d
The brass-bound helm, to stay the weapon’s point;
Through helm and bone it pass’d, and all the brain
Was shatter’d; forward as he rush’d, he fell.
Them left he there, their bare breasts gleaming white,
Stripp’d of their arms; and hasten’d in pursuit
Of Antiphus and Isus, Priam’s sons,
A bastard one, and one legitimate,
Both on one car; the bastard held the reins:
Beside him stood the gallant Antiphus.
Them, as they fed their flocks on Ida’s heights,
Achilles once had captive made, and bound
With willow saplings, till for ransom freed.
The mighty monarch, Agamemnon, drove
Through Isus’ breast his spear; his weighty sword
Descended on the head of Antiphus
Beside the ear, and hurl’d him from his car;
These of their armour he despoil’d in haste,
Known to him both; for he had seen them oft
Beside the ships, when thither captive brought
From Ida by Achilles, swift of foot.
As when a lion in their lair hath seiz’d
The helpless offspring of a mountain doe,
And breaks their bones with ease, and with strong teeth
Crushes their tender life; nor can their dam,
Though close at hand she be, avail them aught;
For she herself by deadly terror seiz’d,
Through the thick coppice and the forest flies,
Panting, and bath’d in sweat, the monster’s rush;
So dar’d no Trojan give those brethren aid,
Themselves in terror of the warlike Greeks.
Peisander next, and bold Hippolochus,
Sons of Antimachus (’twas he who chief,
Seduc’d by Paris’ gold and splendid gifts,
Advis’d the restitution to refuse
Of Helen to her Lord), the King assail’d;
Both on one car; but from their hands had dropp’d
The broider’d reins; bewilder’d there they stood;
While, with a lion’s bound, upon them sprang
The son of Atreus; suppliant, in the car,
They clasp’d his knees; “Give quarter, Atreus’ son,
Redeem our lives; our sire Antimachus
Possesses goodly store of brass and gold,
And well-wrought iron; and of these he fain
Would pay a noble ransom, could he hear
That in the Grecian ships we yet surviv’d.”

Thus they, with gentle words, and tears, imploring;
But all ungentle was the voice they heard
In answer; “If indeed ye be the sons
Of that Antimachus, who counsel gave,
When noble Menelaus came to Troy
With sage Ulysses, as ambassadors,
To slay them both, nor suffer their return,
Pay now the forfeit of your father’s guilt.”
He said, and with a spear-thrust through his breast
Peisander dash’d to earth; backward he fell.
Down leap’d Hippolochus; but Atreus’ son
Severing his hands and neck, amid the throng
Sent whirling like a bowl the gory head.
These left he there; and where the thickest throng
Maintain’d the tug of war, thither he flew,
And with him eager hosts of well-greav’d Greeks.
Soon on the Trojans’ flight enforc’d they hung,
Destroying; foot on foot, and horse on horse;
While from the plain thick clouds of dust arose
Beneath the armed hoofs of clatt’ring steeds;
And on the monarch Agamemnon press’d,
Still slaying, urging still the Greeks to arms.
As when amid a densely timber’d wood
Light the devouring flames, by eddying winds
Hither and thither borne, fast falls the copse
Prostrate beneath the fire’s impetuous course;
So thickly fell the flying Trojans’ heads
Beneath the might of Agamemnon’s arm;
And here and there, athwart the pass of war,
Was many an empty car at random whirl’d
By strong-neck’d steeds, of guiding hands bereft;
Stretch’d on the plain they lay, more welcome sight
To carrion birds than to their widow’d wives.
But Hector, from the fray and din of war,
And dust, and blood, and carnage, Jove withdrew.
Still on Atrides press’d, the Greek pursuit
With eager shouts exciting; past the tomb
Of Ilus, ancient son of Dardanus,
And tow’rd the fig-tree, midway o’er the plain,
Straining to gain the town, the Trojans fled;
While loudly shouting, his unconquer’d hands
With carnage dyed, Atrides urg’d their flight.
But when the Scaean gates and oak were reach’d,
They made a stand, and fac’d the foe’s assault.
Some o’er the open plain were yet dispers’d;
As heifers, by a lion scatter’d wide,
At dead of night; all fly; on one descends
The doom of death; her with his pow’rful teeth
He seizes, and, her neck first broken, rends,
And on her entrails gorging, laps her blood.
So these the monarch Agamemnon chas’d,
Slaying the hindmost; they in terror fled:
Some headlong, backward some, Atrides’ hand
Hurl’d from their chariot many a warrior bold;
So forward and so fierce he bore his spear.
But as he near’d the city, and stood beneath
The lofty wall, the Sire of Gods and men
From Heav’n descended; on the topmost height
Of Ida’s spring-abounding hill he sat:
And while his hand the lightning grasp’d, he thus
To golden-winged Iris gave command:

“Haste thee, swift Iris, and to Hector bear
From me this message; bid him, that as long
As Agamemnon in the van appears,
Raging, and dealing death among the ranks,
He from the battle keep himself aloof,
But urge the rest undaunted to maintain
The stubborn fight; but should Atrides, struck
By spear or arrow, to his car withdraw,
He shall from me receive such pow’r to slay,
As to the ships shall bear him, ere the sun
Decline, and Darkness spread her hallowing shade.”

Thus he; to Troy, obedient to his word,
From Ida’s heights swift-footed Iris sped:
Amid the horses and the well-fram’d cars
The godlike Hector, Priam’s son, she found,
And stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Hector, thou son of Priam, sage as Jove
In council, he the Universal Lord
Sends thee by me this message; that as long
As Agamemnon in the van appears,
Raging, and dealing death amid the ranks,
Thou from the battle keep thyself aloof,
But urge the rest undaunted to maintain
The stubborn fight; but should Atrides, struck
By spear or arrow, to his car withdraw,
Thou shalt from him receive such pow’r to slay
As to the ships shall bear thee, ere the sun
Decline, and Darkness spread her hallowing shade.”

Swift-footed Iris said, and disappear’d;
But from his chariot Hector leap’d to earth,
Hither and thither passing through the ranks,
With brandish’d jav’lins urging to the fight.
Loud, at his bidding, rose the battle-cry;
Back roll’d the tide; again they fac’d the Greeks:
On th’ other side the Greeks their masses form’d,
In line of battle rang’d; opposed they stood;
And in the front, to none content to cede
The foremost place, was Agamemnon seen.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Of all the Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Who first oppos’d to Agamemnon stood.
Iphidamas, Antenor’s gallant son,
Stalwart and brave; in fertile Thracia bred,
Mother of flocks; him, in his infant years,
His grandsire Cisseus, fair Theano’s sire,
In his own palace rear’d; and when he reach’d
The perfect measure of his glorious youth,
Still in his house retain’d him, and to wife
Gave him his daughter; but when tidings came
Of Grecian warfare, from the marriage straight
Embarking, with twelve beaked ships he sailed,
That owned his sway; these on Percote’s shore
He left; and came himself on foot to Troy;
Who now confronted Atreus’ godlike son.

When near they drew, Atrides miss’d his aim,
His spear diverging; then Iphidamas
Beneath the breastplate, striking on his belt,
Strove with strong hand to drive the weapon home:
Yet could not pierce the belt’s close-plaited work;
The point, encounter’d by the silver fold,
Was bent, like lead; then with his pow’rful hand
The monarch Agamemnon seiz’d the spear,
And tow’rd him drew, and with a lion’s strength
Wrench’d from his foeman’s grasp; then on his neck
Let fall his sword, and slack’d his limbs in death.
There, falling in his country’s cause, he slept
The iron sleep of death; unhappy he,
Far from his virgin-bride, yet unpossess’d,
Though bought with costly presents; first he gave
A hundred steers; and promis’d thousands more
Of sheep and goats from out his countless flocks.
Him Agamemnon of his arms despoil’d,
And to the crowd of Greeks the trophies bore.
But when Antenor’s eldest-born beheld,
Coon, th’ observ’d of all men, bitt’rest grief
His eyes o’ershadow’d, for his brother’s fate;
And, unperceiv’d by Atreus’ godlike son,
Standing aside, he struck him with his spear,
Through the mid arm, beneath the elbow’s bend;
And drove right through the weapon’s glitt’ring point.
Writh’d with the pain the mighty King of men;
Yet from the combat flinch’d he not, nor quail’d:
But grasping firm his weather-toughen’d spear
On Coon rush’d, as by the feet he drew
His father’s son, Iphidamas, away,
Invoking all the bravest to his aid;
And as he drew the body tow’rd the crowd,
Beneath the bossy shield the monarch thrust
His brass-clad spear, and slack’d his limbs in death;
Then near approaching, ev’n upon the corpse
Of dead Iphidamas, struck off his head:
So by Atrides’ hand, Antenor’s sons,
Their doom accomplish’d, to the shades were sent.
Then through the crowded ranks, with spear and sword,
And massive stones, he held his furious course,
While the hot blood was welling from his arm;
But when the wound was dry, and stanch’d the blood,
Keen anguish then Atrides’ might subdued.
As when a woman in her labour-throes
Sharp pangs encompass, by Lucina sent,
Who rules o’er child-birth travail, ev’n so keen
The pangs that then Atrides’ might subdued.
Mounting his car he bade his charioteer
Drive to the ships; for sore his spirit was pain’d;
But loud and clear he shouted to the Greeks:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Yours be it now our sea-borne ships to guard:
Since Jove, the Lord of counsel, through the day
Wills not that I the battle should maintain.”

He said: and swiftly to the ships were driv’n
His sleek-skinn’d coursers; nothing loth they flew;
With foam their chests were fleck’d, with dust their flanks,
As from the field their wounded Lord they bore:
But Hector, as he saw the King retire,
To Trojans and to Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Put forth your wonted valour; from the field
Their bravest has withdrawn, and Jove on me
Great glory hath shed; now headlong on the Greeks
Urge your swift steeds, and endless honour gain.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast:
And as a hunter cheers his sharp-fang’d hounds
On forest boar or lion; on the Greeks
So cheer’d the valiant Trojans Priam’s son,
Illustrious Hector, stern as blood-stain’d Mars.
Bent on high deeds, himself in front advanc’d,
Fell on the masses as a whirlwind falls,
Lashing with furious sweep the dark-blue sea.

Say then, who first, who last, by Hector’s hand,
Whom Jove had will’d to crown with honour, died.
Assaeus first, and then Autonous,
Opites, and Opheltius, Dolops, son
Of Clytus, and Æsumnus, Agelas
And Orus, and brave Hipponous;
All these the chiefs of Greece; the nameless crowd
He scatter’d next; as when the west wind drives
The clouds, and battles with the hurricane,
Before the clearing blast of Notus driv’n;
The big waves heave and roll, and high aloft,
The gale, careering, flings the ocean spray;
So thick and furious fell on hostile heads
The might of Hector. Now had fearful deeds
Been done, and Greeks beside their ships had fall’n
In shameful rout, had not Ulysses thus
To Diomed, the son of Tydeus, call’d:

“Why, son of Tydeus, should we thus relax
Our warlike courage? come, stand by me now,
True friend! if Hector of the glancing helm
Our ships should capture, great were our disgrace.”

Whom answer’d thus the valiant Diomed:
“Beside thee will I stand, and still endure;
But brief will be the term of our success,
Since Jove, the Cloud-compeller, not to us,
But to the Trojans, wills the victory.”

He said, and from his car Thymbraeus hurl’d,
Through the left breast transfix’d: Ulysses’ hand
His charioteer, the brave Molion, slew.
These left they there, no more to share the fight;
Then turning, spread confusion ’mid the crowd:
As turn two boars upon the hunter’s pack
With desp’rate courage, turning so to bay,
Those two, the Trojans scatt’ring, gave the Greeks,
From Hector flying, time again to breathe.
A car they seiz’d which bore two valiant chiefs,
Sons of Percotian Merops; he, o’er all
In lore prophetic skill’d, would fain at home
Have kept them from the life-destroying war:
But they, by adverse fate impell’d to seek
Their doom of death, his warning voice despis’d.
These two, of strength and life at once bereft,
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed,
Stripp’d of their armour; while Ulysses slew
Hippodamus, and bold Hyperochus.
Thus Jove, from Ida’s height beholding, held
His even scale, each party slaught’ring each.
Then with his spear Tydides through the loins
Agastrophus, the son of Paeon, smote;
No car had he at hand, whereto to fly:
But, ill-advis’d, had in th’ attendants’ charge
His horses left far off; while he himself
Rush’d ’mid the throng on foot, and met his doom.
Hector’s quick glance athwart the files beheld,
And to the rescue, with a shout, he sprang,
The Trojan columns following; not unmov’d
The valiant Diomed his coming saw,
And thus bespoke Ulysses at his side:
“On us this plague, this mighty Hector, falls:
Yet stand we firm, and boldly meet the shock.”
He said, and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
And not in vain; on Hector’s head it struck
His helmet’s crest, but, brass encount’ring brass,
Himself it reach’d not; for the visor’d helm,
Apollo’s gift, three-plated, stay’d its force.
Yet backward Hector sprang amid the crowd,
And on his knees he dropp’d, his stalwart hand
Propp’d on the ground; while darkness veil’d his eyes.
But ere Tydides, following up his spear,
Attain’d from far the spot whereon he fell,
Hector reviv’d, and mounting quick his car,
Drove ’mid the crowd, and ’scap’d the doom of death
Then thus, with threat’ning spear, Tydides cried:
“Yet once again, vile hound, hast thou escap’d;
Thy doom was nigh; but thee thy God hath sav’d,
Phoebus, to whom, amid the clash of spears,
Well mayst thou pray! We yet shall meet again;
When I shall end thee, if a guardian God
I too may claim; meanwhile from thee I turn,
And others seek on whom my hap may light.”

He said, and turn’d him of his arms to strip
The son of Paeon; but beside the stone
That mark’d where men of old had rais’d a mound
To Ilus, Dardan’s son, the ancient chief,
There crouching, Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Against the son of Tydeus bent his bow.
He from the breast of brave Agastrophus
Had stripp’d the corslet; from his shoulders broad
The buckler, and the helmet from his head,
When Paris bent his bow, and not in vain
His arrow launch’d; Tydides’ dexter foot
Right through it pierc’d, and pinn’d it to the ground.
Joyous he laugh’d, and from his hiding place
Sprang forth, and thus in tones of triumph cried:

“Thou hast it! not in vain my shaft hath flown!
Would that, deep buried in thy flank, it touch’d
Thy very life! so should our Trojans lose
Their panic fear, who now on thee with dread,
As bleating goats upon a lion, look.”

To whom, unmov’d, the valiant Diomed:
“Poor archer, trusting to thy bow alone,
Vile sland’rer and seducer! if indeed
Thou durst in arms oppos’d to me to stand,
Nought would avail thy arrows and thy bow:
And now, because thy shaft hath graz’d my foot,
Thou mak’st thine empty boast: I heed thee not,
More than a woman or a puny child:
A worthless coward’s weapon hath no point.
’Tis diff’rent far with me! though light it fall,
My spear is sharp, and whom it strikes, it slays.
His widow’s cheeks are mark’d with scars of grief,
His children orphans; rotting on the ground,
Red with his blood, he lies, his fun’ral rites
By carrion birds, and not by women paid.”

Thus while he spoke, Ulysses, spearman bold,
Drew near, and stood before him; he, behind,
Sat down protected, and from out his foot
The arrow drew; whereat sharp anguish shot
Through all his flesh; and mounting on his car
He bade his faithful charioteer in haste
Drive to the ships, for pain weigh’d down his soul.
Alone Ulysses stood; of all the Greeks
Not one beside him; all were panic-struck:
Then with his spirit, perturb’d, he commun’d thus:
“Me miserable! which way shall I choose?
’Twere ill indeed that I should turn to flight
By hostile numbers daunted; yet ’twere worse
Here to be caught alone; and Saturn’s son
With panic fear the other Greeks hath fill’d.
Yet why, my soul, admit such thoughts as these?
I know that cowards from the battle fly;
But he who boasts a warrior’s name, must learn,
Wounded or wounding, firmly still to stand.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
Onward the buckler’d ranks of Trojans came,
And, to their harm, encircled him around.
As when a boar, by dogs and stalwart youths
Attack’d, the shelt’ring thicket leaves, and whets
The tusks that gleam between his curved jaws;
They crowd around, though ring his clatt’ring tusks,
And, fearful though it be, await his rush:
So crowded round Ulysses, dear to Jove,
The Trojans; he, with brandish’d spear aloft,
Sprang forth, and through the shoulder, from above,
Deiopites wounded: Thoon next
He slew, and Ennomus; then with his spear
Chersidamas, in act to quit his car,
Thrust through the loins below his bossy shield:
Prone in the dust, he clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil.
From these he turn’d; and wounded with his spear
Charops, the high-born Socus’ brother, son
Of Hippasus; then forward sprang, to aid
His brother, godlike Socus; close he stood
Before Ulysses, and address’d him thus:
“Far-fam’d Ulysses, as in arms, in wiles
Unwearied, thou this day o’er both the sons
Of Hippasus, two mighty warriors slain,
And of their armour spoil’d, shalt make thy boast,
Or by my spear thyself shalt lose thy life.”
He said, and on the shield’s broad circle struck:
Through the bright shield the sturdy weapon drove,
And through the rich-wrought baldrick, from the ribs
Tearing the flesh away; but Pallas seiz’d,
And turn’d it from the vital parts aside.
The wound, Ulysses knew, was not to death,
And back he drew, and thus to Socus cried:

“Ill-fated thou! thy doom hath found thee now;
Me hast thou hinder’d from the war awhile;
But thee to swift destruction and dark death,
This day I doom: great glory, of thee subdued,
Shall I obtain, and Hades take thy soul.”

Thus he: and Socus, turning, sought to fly;
But as he turn’d him round, Ulysses’ spear
Behind his neck, between the shoulder blades
Was driv’n, and through his chest; thund’ring he fell,
And o’er his fall Ulysses, vaunting, thus:

“Socus, thou son of warlike Hippasus,
Here hast thou found, nor couldst escape, thy doom.
Ill-fated thou! nor sire’s nor mother’s hand
Shall gather up thy bones, but carrion birds
O’er thee shall flap their baleful wings, and tear
Thy mangled flesh; for me, whene’er I die
The sons of Greece will build my fun’ral pile.”
From out his flesh, and from the bossy shield,
The spear of Socus, as he spoke, he drew;
And as he drew it forth, out gush’d his blood,
With anguish keen. The Trojans, when they saw
Ulysses’ blood, with clam’rous shouts advanc’d
Promiscuous; he, retiring, shouted loud
To call his comrades; loud as head of man
Could bear, he shouted thrice; and thrice his shout
The warlike Menelaus heard, and thus
To Ajax, standing by his side, he spoke:

“Ajax, thou Heav’n-born son of Telamon,
Great chief of men, methinks I hear the voice
Of stout Ulysses, as though left alone,
And in the stubborn fight cut off from aid,
By Trojans overmaster’d. Haste we then,
For so ’twere best, to give him present aid.
Brave though he be, yet left alone, I fear
Great cause we Greeks may have to mourn his loss.”

He spoke, and led the way; the godlike chief
Follow’d his steps: Ulysses, dear to Jove,
Surrounded by the Trojan host they found,
As hungry jackals on the mountain side
Around a stag, that from an archer’s hand
Hath taken hurt, yet while his blood was warm
And limbs yet serv’d, has baffled his pursuit;
But when the fatal shaft has drain’d his strength,
Thirsting for blood, beneath the forest shade,
The jackals seize their victim; then if chance
A hungry lion pass, the jackals shrink
In terror back, while he devours the prey;
So round Ulysses, sage in council, press’d
The Trojans, many and brave, yet nobly he
Averted, spear in hand, the fatal hour;
Till, with his tow’r-like shield before him borne,
Appear’d great Ajax, and beside him stood.
Hither and thither then the Trojans fled;
While with supporting arm from out the crowd
The warlike Menelaus led him forth,
Till his attendant with his car drew near.
Then Ajax, on the Trojans springing, slew
Doryclus, royal Priam’s bastard son;
Next Pyrasus he smote, and Pandocus,
Lysander, and Pylartes; as a stream,
Swoll’n by the rains of Heav’n, that from the hills
Pours down its wintry torrent on the plain;
And many a blighted oak, and many a pine
It bears, with piles of drift-wood, to the sea
So swept illustrious Ajax o’er the plain,
O’erthrowing men and horses; though unknown
To Hector; he, upon Scamander’s banks
Was warring on the field’s extremest left,
Where round great Nestor and the warlike King
Idomeneus, while men were falling fast,
Rose, irrepressible, the battle cry.
Hector, ’mid these, was working wondrous deeds,
With spear and car, routing th’ opposed youth;
Yet had the Greeks ev’n so their ground maintain’d,
But godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Through the right shoulder, with a three-barb’d shaft,
As in the front he fought, Machaon quell’d:
For him the warrior Greeks were sore afraid
Lest he, as back the line of battle roll’d,
Might to the foe be left; to Nestor then
Idomeneus address’d his speech, and said:

“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Haste thee to mount thy car, and with thee take
Machaon; tow’rd the vessels urge with speed
The flying steeds; worth many a life is his,
The skilful leech, who knows, with practis’d hand,
T’ extract the shaft, and healing drugs apply.”

He said: Gerenian Nestor at the word
Mounted his car, Machaon at his side,
The skilful leech, sage Æsculapius’ son:
He touch’d his horses; tow’rd the Grecian ships,
As was his purpose, nothing loth, they flew.

To Hector then Cebriones, who saw
Confus’d the Trojans’ right, drew near, and said:

“Hector, we here, on th’ outskirts of the field,
O’erpow’r the Greeks; on th’ other side, our friends
In strange confusion mingled, horse and man,
Are driv’n; among them Ajax spreads dismay,
The son of Telamon; I know him well,
And the broad shield that o’er his shoulders hangs;
Thither direct we then our car, where most
In mutual slaughter horse and foot engage,
And loudest swells, uncheck’d, the battle cry.”

He said, and with the pliant lash he touch’d
The sleek-skinn’d horses; springing at the sound,
Between the Greeks and Trojans, light they bore
The flying car, o’er bodies of the slain
And broken bucklers trampling; all beneath
Was plash’d with blood the axle, and the rails
Around the car, as from the horses’ feet,
And from the felloes of the wheels, were thrown
The bloody gouts; yet on he sped, to join
The strife of men, and break th’ opposing ranks.
His coming spread confusion ’mid the Greeks,
His spear awhile withheld; then through the rest,
With sword, and spear, and pond’rous stones he rush’d,
But shunn’d the might of Ajax Telamon.

But Jove, high thron’d, the soul of Ajax fill’d
With fear; aghast he stood; his sev’nfold shield
He threw behind his back, and, trembling, gaz’d
Upon the crowd; then, like some beast of prey,
Foot slowly following foot, reluctant turn’d.
As when the rustic youths and dogs have driv’n
A tawny lion from the cattle fold,
Watching all night, and baulk’d him of his prey;
Rav’ning for flesh, he still th’ attempt renews,
But still in vain: for many a jav’lin, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms, confronts him to his face,
And blazing faggots, that his courage daunt;
Till, with the dawn, reluctant he retreat:
So from before the Trojans Ajax turn’d,
Reluctant, fearing for the ships of Greece.
As near a field of corn, a stubborn ass,
Upon whose sides had many a club been broke,
O’erpow’rs his boyish guides, and ent’ring in,
On the rich forage grazes; while the boys
Their cudgels ply, but vain their puny strength,
Yet drive him out, when fully fed, with ease:
Ev’n so great Ajax, son of Telamon,
The valiant Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Still thrusting at his shield, before them drove:
Yet would he sometimes, rallying, hold in check
The Trojan host; then turn again to flight,
Yet barring still the passage to the ships.
Midway between the Trojans and the Greeks
He stood defiant; many jav’lins, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms, were in their flight receiv’d
On his broad shield; and many, ere they reach’d
Their living mark, fell midway on the plain,
Fix’d in the ground, in vain athirst for blood.
Him thus, hard press’d by thick-thrown spears, beheld
Eurypylus, Euaemon’s noble son.
He hasten’d up, and aim’d his glitt’ring spear;
And Apisaon, Phausias’ noble son,
Below the midriff through the liver struck,
And straight relax’d in sudden death his limbs.
Forth sprang Eurypylus to seize the spoils:
But godlike Paris saw, and as he stoop’d
From Apisaon’s corpse to strip his arms,
Against Eurypylus he bent his bow,
And his right thigh transfix’d; the injur’d limb
Disabling, in the wound the arrow broke.
He ’mid his friends, escaping death, withdrew,
And to the Greeks with piercing shout he call’d:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Turn yet again, and from the doom of death
Great Ajax save, hard press’d by hostile spears:
Scarce can I hope he may escape with life
The desp’rate fight; yet bravely stand, and aid
The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.”

Thus spoke the wounded hero: round him they
With sloping shields and spears uplifted stood:
Ajax to meet them came; and when he reach’d
The friendly ranks, again he turn’d to bay.
So rag’d, like blazing fire, the furious fight.

Meanwhile the mares of Neleus, drench’d with sweat,
Bore Nestor and Machaon from the field;
Achilles saw, and mark’d them where he stood
Upon his lofty vessel’s prow, and watch’d
The grievous toil, the lamentable rout.
Then on his friend Patroclus from the ship
He call’d aloud; he heard his voice, and forth,
As Mars majestic, from the tent he came:
(That day commenc’d his evil destiny)
And thus Menoetius’ noble son began:

“Why call’st thou me? what wouldst thou, Peleus’ son?”
To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Son of Menoetius, dearest to my soul,
Soon, must the suppliant Greeks before me kneel,
So insupportable is now their need.
But haste thee now, Patroclus, dear to Jove:
Enquire of Nestor, from the battle field
Whom brings he wounded: looking from behind
Most like he seem’d to Æsculapius’ son,
Machaon; but his face I could not see,
So swiftly past the eager horses flew.”

He said: obedient to his friend’s command,
Quick to the tents and ships Patroclus ran.

They, when they reach’d the tent of Neleus’ son,
Descended to the ground; Eurymedon
The old man’s mares unharness’d from the car,
While on the beach they fac’d the cooling breeze,
Which from their garments dried the sweat; then turn’d,
And in the tent on easy seats repos’d.
For them the fair-hair’d Hecamede mix’d
A cordial potion; her from Tenedos,
When by Achilles ta’en, the old man brought;
Daughter of great Arsinous, whom the Greeks
On him, their sagest councillor, bestow’d.
Before them first a table fair she spread,
Well polish’d, and with feet of solid bronze;
On this a brazen canister she plac’d,
And onions, as a relish to the wine,
And pale clear honey, and pure barley meal:
By these a splendid goblet, which from home
Th’ old man had brought, with golden studs adorn’d:
Four were its handles, and round each two doves
Appear’d to feed; at either end, a cup.
Scarce might another move it from the board,
When full; but aged Nestor rais’d with ease.
In this, their goddess-like attendant first
A gen’rous measure mix’d of Pramnian wine:
Then with a brazen grater shredded o’er
The goatsmilk cheese, and whitest barley meal,
And of the draught compounded bade them drink.
They drank, and then, reliev’d the parching thirst,
With mutual converse entertain’d the hour.
Before the gate divine Patroclus stood:
The old man saw, and from his seat arose,
And took him by the hand, and led him in,
And bade him sit; but he, refusing, said:

“No seat for me, thou venerable sire!
I must not stay; for he both awe and fear
Commands, who hither sent me to enquire
What wounded man thou hast; I need not ask,
I know Machaon well, his people’s guard.
My errand done, I must my message bear
Back to Achilles; and thou know’st thyself,
Thou venerable sire, how stern his mood:
Nay sometimes blames he, where no blame is due.”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Whence comes Achilles’ pity for the Greeks
By Trojan weapons wounded? knows he not
What depth of suff’ring through the camp prevails?
How in the ships, by arrow or by spear
Sore wounded, all our best and bravest lie?
The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Pierc’d by a shaft; Ulysses by a spear,
And Agamemnon’s self; Eurypylus
By a sharp arrow through the thigh transfix’d;
And here another, whom but now I bring,
Shot by a bow, from off the battle field:
Achilles, valiant as he is, the while
For Grecian woes nor care nor pity feels.
Waits he, until our ships beside the sea,
In our despite, are burnt by hostile fires,
And we be singly slain? not mine is now
The strength I boasted once of active limbs.
O that such youth and vigour yet were mine,
As when about a cattle-lifting raid
We fought th’ Eleans; there Itymoneus
I slew, the son of brave Hyperochus,
Who dwelt in Elis; and my booty drove.
He sought to guard the herd; but from my hand
A jav’lin struck him in the foremost ranks:
He fell, and terror seiz’d the rustic crowd.
Abundant store of plunder from the plain
We drove: of horned cattle fifty herds;
As many flocks of sheep, as many droves
Of swine, as many wide-spread herds of goats,
And thrice so many golden-chesnut mares,
The foals of many running with their dams.
To Pylos, Neleus’ city, these we drove
By night; and much it gladden’d Neleus’ heart,
That I, though new to war, such prize had won.
When morn appear’d, the clear-voic’d heralds call’d
For all to whom from Elis debts were due;
Collected thus, the Pylians’ leading men
Division made: for Elis ow’d us much;
Such wrongs we few in Pylos had sustain’d.
The might of Hercules in former years
Had storm’d our town, and all our bravest slain.
Twelve gallant sons had Neleus; I of these
Alone was left; the others all were gone.
Whence over-proud, th’ Epeians treated us
With insult, and high-handed violence.
A herd of oxen now, and num’rous flock
Of sheep, th’ old man selected for himself,
Three hundred, with their shepherds; for to him
Large compensation was from Elis due.
Train’d to the course, four horses, with their cars,
He for the Tripod at th’ Elean games
Had sent to run; these Augeas, King of men,
Detain’d, and bade the drivers home return,
Bootless, and grieving for their horses’ loss.
Th’ old man his words resenting, and his acts,
Large spoils retain’d; the rest among the crowd
He shar’d, that none might lose his portion due.
These we dispos’d of soon, and to the Gods
Due off’rings made; but when the third day rose,
Back in all haste, in numbers, horse and foot,
Our foes return’d; with, them the Molion twins,
Yet boys, untutor’d in the arts of war.
Far off, by Alpheus’ banks, th’ extremest verge
Of sandy Pylos, is a lofty mound,
The city of Thryum; which around, intent
To raze its walls, their army was encamp’d.
The plain already they had overspread;
When Pallas from Olympus’ heights came down
In haste, and bade us all prepare for war.
On no unwilling ears her message fell,
But eager all for fight; but me, to arm
Neleus forbade, and e’en my horses hid,
Deeming me yet unripe for deeds of war.
Yet so, albeit on foot, by Pallas’ grace
A name I gain’d above our noblest horse.
There is a river, Minyis by name,
Hard by Arene, flowing to the sea,
Where we, the Pylian horse, expecting morn,
Encamp’d, by troops of footmen quickly join’d.
Thence in all haste advancing, all in arms,
We reach’d, by midday, Alpheus’ sacred stream.
There, to o’erruling Jove our off’rings made,
To Alpheus and to Neptune each a bull,
To Pallas, blue-ey’d Maid, a heifer fair,
In order’d ranks we took our ev’ning meal,
And each in arms upon the river’s brink
Lay down to rest; for close beside us lay
Th’ Epeians, on the town’s destruction bent.
Then saw they mighty deeds of war display’d;
For we, as sunlight overspread the earth,
To Jove and Pallas praying, battle gave.
But when the Pylians and th’ Epeians met,
I first a warrior slew, and seiz’d his car,
Bold spearman, Mulius; Augeas’ son-in-law,
His eldest daughter’s husband, Agamede,
The yellow-hair’d, who all the virtues knew
Of each medicinal herb the wide world grows.
Him, with my brass-tipp’d spear, as on he came,
I slew; he fell; I, rushing to his car,
Stood ’mid the foremost ranks; th’ Epeians brave
Fled diverse, when they saw their champion fall,
Chief of their horsemen, foremost in the fight.
With the dark whirlwind’s force, I onward rush’d,
And fifty cars I took; two men in each
Fell to my spear, and bit the bloody dust.
Then Actor’s sons, the Molions, had I slain,
Had not th’ Earth-shaking God, their mighty sire,
Veil’d in thick cloud, withdrawn them from the field;
Then Jove great glory to the Pylians gave.
For o’er the wide-spread plain we held pursuit,
Slaying, and gath’ring up the scatter’d arms,
Nor till corn-clad Buprasium, and the rock
Olenian, and Alesium, term’d the Mound,
Stay’d we our steeds; there Pallas bade us turn.
There the last man I slew, and left; the Greeks
Back from Buprasium drove their flying cars
To Pylos, magnifying all the name,
’Mid men, of Nestor, as ’mid Gods, of Jove.
Such once was I ’mid men, while yet I was;
Now to himself alone Achilles keeps
His valour; yet hereafter, when the Greeks
Have perish’d all, remorse shall touch his soul.
Dear friend, remember now th’ injunctions giv’n
By old Menoetius, when from Phthian land
He sent thee forth to Agamemnon’s aid:
I, and Laertes’ godlike son, within,
Heard all his counsel; to the well-built house
Of Peleus we on embassy had come,
Throughout Achaia’s fertile lands to raise
The means of war; Menoetius there we found,
Achilles, and thyself within the house;
While in the court-yard aged Peleus slew,
And to the Lord of thunder offer’d up
A fatten’d steer; and from a golden bowl
O’er the burnt-off’ring pour’d the ruddy wine.
We two, while ye were busied with the flesh,
Stood at the gate; surpris’d, Achilles rose,
And took us by the hand, and bade us sit,
Dispensing all the hospitable rites.
With food and wine recruited, I began
My speech, and urg’d ye both to join the war:
Nor were ye loth to go; much sage advice
Your elders gave; old Peleus bade his son
To aim at highest honours, and surpass
His comrades all; Menoetius, Actor’s son,
To thee this counsel gave: ‘My son,’ he said,
‘Achilles is by birth above thee far;
Thou art in years the elder; he in strength
Surpasses thee; do thou with prudent words
And timely speech address him, and advise
And guide him; he will, to his good, obey.’

“Such were the old man’s words; but thou hast let
His counsel slip thy mem’ry; yet ev’n now
Speak to Achilles thus, and stir his soul,
If haply he will hear thee; and who knows
But by the grace of Heav’n thou mayst prevail?
For great is oft a friend’s persuasive pow’r.
But if the fear of evil prophesied,
Or message by his Goddess-mother brought
From Jove, restrain him, let him send thee forth
With all his force of warlike Myrmidons,
That thou mayst be the saving light of Greece.
Then let him bid thee to the battle bear
His glitt’ring arms; if so the men of Troy,
Scar’d by his likeness, may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.
Fresh and unwearied, ye with ease may drive
To their own city, from our ships and tents,
The Trojans, worn and battle-wearied men.”

Thus he; Patroclus’ spirit within him burn’d,
And tow’rd Achilles’ tent in haste he sped.
But, running, as Ulysses’ ship he pass’d,
Where was the Council and the Justice-seat,
And where were built the altars of the Gods,
There met him, halting from the battle-field,
Shot through the thigh, Euaemon’s Heav’n-born son,
Eurypylus; his head and shoulders dank
With clammy sweat, while from his grievous wound
Stream’d the dark blood; yet firm was still his soul.
Menoetius’ noble son with pity saw,
And deeply sorrowing thus address’d the chief:

“Woe for the chiefs and councillors of Greece!
And must ye, far from friends and native home,
Glut with your flesh the rav’ning dogs of Troy?
Yet tell me this, Heav’n-born Eurypylus;
Still do the Greeks ’gainst Hector’s giant force
Make head? or fall they, vanquish’d by his spear?”

To whom with prudent speech, Eurypylus:
“No source, Heav’n-born Patroclus, have the Greeks,
Of aid, but all must perish by their ships:
For in the ships lie all our bravest late,
By spear or arrow struck, by Trojan hands;
And fiercer, hour by hour, their onset grows.
But save me now, and lead me to the ships;
There cut the arrow out, and from the wound
With tepid water cleanse the clotted blood:
Then soothing drugs apply, of healing pow’r,
Which from Achilles, thou, ’tis said, hast learn’d,
From Chiron, justest of the Centaurs, he.
For Podalirius and Machaon both,
Our leeches, one lies wounded in the tents,
Himself requiring sore the leech’s aid;
The other on the plain still dares the fight.”

To whom again Menoetius’ noble son:
“How may this be? say, brave Eurypylus,
What must I do? a messenger am I,
Sent by Gerenian Nestor, prop of Greece,
With tidings to Achilles; yet ev’n so
I will not leave thee in this weary plight.”

He said, and passing his supporting hand
Beneath his breast, the wounded warrior led
Within the tent; th’ attendant saw, and spread
The ox-hide couch; then as he lay reclin’d,
Patroclus, with his dagger, from the thigh
Cut out the biting shaft; and from the wound
With tepid water cleans’d the clotted blood;
Then, pounded in his hands, a root applied
Astringent, anodyne, which all his pain
Allay’d; the wound was dried, and stanch’d the blood.



ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN WALL.


The Greeks having retired into their entrenchments, Hector attempts to
force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas
advises to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. The
Trojans follow his counsel, and having divided their army into five
bodies of foot, begin the assault. But upon the signal of an eagle with
a serpent in his talons, which appeared on the left hand of the
Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to withdraw them again. This Hector
opposes, and continues the attack; in which, after many actions,
Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall: Hector also, casting a
stone of a vast size, forces open one of the gates, and enters at the
head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians even to their
ships.

BOOK XII.

Thus o’er the wounded chief Eurypylus
Watch’d in his tent Menoetius’ noble son;
But hand to hand the Greeks and Trojans fought;
Nor longer might the ditch th’ assault repel,
Nor the broad wall above, which Greeks had built,
To guard their ships, and round it dug the ditch;
But to the Gods no hecatombs had paid,
That they the ships and all the stores within
Might safely keep; against the will of Heav’n
The work was done, and thence not long endur’d.
While Hector liv’d, and Peleus’ son his wrath
Retain’d, and Priam’s city untaken stood;
So long the Grecian wall remain’d entire:
But of the Trojans when the best had fall’n,
Of Greeks, when some were slain, some yet surviv’d;
When the tenth year had seen the fall of Troy,
And Greeks, embark’d, had ta’en their homeward way,
Then Neptune and Apollo counsel took
To sap the wall by aid of all the streams
That seaward from the heights of Ida flow;
Rhesus, Caresus, and Heptaporus,
Granicus, and Æsepus, Rhodius,
Scamander’s stream divine, and Simois,
Where helms and shields lay buried in the sand,
And a whole race of warrior demigods:
These all Apollo to one channel turn’d;
Nine days against the wall the torrent beat;
And Jove sent rain continuous, that the wall
Might sooner be submerg’d; while Neptune’s self,
His trident in his hand, led on the stream,
Washing away the deep foundations, laid,
Laborious, by the Greeks, with logs and stones,
Now by fast-flowing Hellespont dispers’d.
The wall destroy’d, o’er all the shore he spread
A sandy drift; and bade the streams return
To where of old their silver waters flow’d.
Such were, in future days, to be the works
Of Neptune and Apollo; but meanwhile
Fierce rag’d the battle round the firm-built wall,
And frequent clatter’d on the turrets’ beams
The hostile missiles: by the scourge of Jove
Subdued, the Greeks beside their ships were hemm’d,
By Hector scar’d, fell minister of Dread,
Who with the whirlwind’s force, as ever, fought.
As when, by dogs and hunters circled round,
A boar, or lion, in his pride of strength,
Turns on his foes, while they in close array
Stand opposite, and frequent shoot their darts;
Nor yet his spirit quails, but firm he stands
With suicidal courage; swift he turns,
Where best to break the circling ranks; where’er
He makes his rush, the circling ranks give way:
So Hector, here and there, amid the crowd,
Urg’d his companions on to cross the ditch:
The fiery steeds shrank back, and, snorting, stood
Upon the topmost brink; for the wide ditch
Withheld them, easy nor to leap nor cross:
For steep arose on either side the banks,
And at the top with sharpen’d stakes were crown’d,
Thick-set and strong, which there the sons of Greece
Had planted, to repel th’ invading foes.
Scarce might a horse, with well-wheel’d car attach’d,
Essay the passage; but on foot they burn’d
To make th’ attempt; and thus Polydamas,
Approaching near, to valiant Hector spoke:

“Hector, and all ye other chiefs of Troy,
And brave Allies, in vain we seek to drive
Our horses o’er the ditch; ’tis hard to cross;
’Tis crown’d with pointed stakes, and them behind
Is built the Grecian wall; there to descend
And from our cars in narrow space to fight
Were certain ruin. If it be indeed
The will of Jove, high-thund’ring, to confound
The Greeks in utter rout, and us to aid,
I should rejoice that ev’ry Greek forthwith
Far from his home should fill a nameless grave;
But should they turn, and we again be driv’n
Back from the ships, and hurried down the ditch,
Such were our loss, that scarce a messenger
Would live to bear the tidings to the town
Of our destruction by the rallied Greeks.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
With our attendants here upon the bank
To leave our horses; and ourselves on foot,
All arm’d, press on where Hector leads; the Greeks,
If that their doom be nigh, will make no stand.”

Thus spoke Polydamas; his counsel pleas’d;
And Hector sprang, in arms, from off his car;
Nor long, the noble Hector when they saw,
Delay’d the other chiefs; then gave command
Each to his own attendant, by the ditch
To keep the chariots all in due array;
Then parting, form’d in order of attack,
In five divisions, with their sev’ral chiefs.
Round Hector throng’d, and bold Polydamas,
The best and bravest; they who long’d the most
To storm the wall, and fight beside the ships.
With them Cebriones; for Hector left,
To guard the horses, one of lesser note.
The next division was by Paris led,
Agenor, and Alcathous; the third
By Helenus, and brave Deiphobus,
Two sons of Priam; Asius was the third,
Asius, the son of Hyrtacus; who brought
His tow’ring fiery steeds from Selles’ stream,
Hard by Arisba; stout Æneas led
The fourth, Anchises’ son, Archilochus
With him, and Acamas, Antenor’s sons;
Both skill’d alike in ev’ry point of war.
Of the far-fam’d Allies, Sarpedon held
The chief command; and for his comrades chose
Asteropaeus, and the warlike might
Of Glaucus; these o’er all the rest he held
Pre-eminent in valour, save himself,
Who o’er them all superior stood confess’d.
These, interlac’d their shields of tough bull’s-hide,
With eager step advanc’d, and deem’d the Greeks
Would, unresisting, fall before their ships.
The other Trojans and renown’d Allies
The words of wise Polydamas obey’d:
But Asius, son of Hyrtacus, refus’d
His horses and his charioteer to leave,
With them advancing to assail the ships.
Blind fool, unconscious! from before those ships,
Escap’d from death, with horses and with car
Triumphant, to the breezy heights of Troy
He never shall return; ill-omen’d fate
O’ershadowing, dooms him by the spear to fall
Of brave Idomeneus, Deucalion’s son.
He tow’rd the left inclin’d, what way the Greeks
With horse and chariot from the plain return’d.
That way he drove his horses; and the gates
Unguarded found by bolt or massive bar.
Their warders held them open’d wide, to save
Perchance some comrade, flying from the plain.
Thither he bent his course; with clamours loud
Follow’d his troops; nor deem’d they that the Greeks
Would hold their ground, but fall amid their ships.
Little they knew; before the gates they found
Two men, two warriors of the prime, two sons
Illustrious of the spear-skill’d Lapithae:
Stout Polypoetes one, Pirithous’ son,
With whom Leonteus, bold as blood-stain’d Mars:
So stood these two before the lofty gates,
As on the mountain side two tow’ring oaks,
Which many a day have borne the wind and storm,
Firm rifted by their strong continuous roots:
So in their arms and vigour confident
Those two great Asius’ charge, undaunted, met.
On th’ other side, with, shouts and wild uproar,
Their bull’s-hide shields uplifted high, advanc’d
Against the well-built wall, Asius the King,
Iamenus, Orestes, Acamas
The son of Asius, and Œnomaus,
And Thoon; those within to save the ships
Calling meanwhile on all the well-greav’d Greeks;
But when they saw the wall by Trojans scal’d,
And heard the cry of Greeks in panic fear,
Sprang forth those two, before the gates to fight.
As when two boars, upon the mountain side,
Await th’ approaching din of men and dogs,
Then sideways rushing, snap the wood around,
Ripp’d from the roots; loud clash their clatt’ring tusks,
Till to the huntsman’s spear they yield their lives;
So clatter’d on those champions’ brass-clad breasts
The hostile weapons; stubbornly they fought,
Relying on their strength, and friends above:
For from the well-built tow’rs huge stones were hurl’d
By those who for themselves, their tents and ships,
Maintain’d defensive warfare; thick they fell,
As wintry snow-flakes, which the boist’rous wind,
Driving the shadowy clouds, spreads fast and close
O’er all the surface of the fertile earth:
So thick, from Grecian and from Trojan hands,
The weapons flew; on helm and bossy shield
With grating sound the pond’rous masses rang.
Then deeply groaning, as he smote his thigh
Thus spoke dismay’d the son of Hyrtacus:
“O Father Jove, how hast thou lov’d our hopes
To falsify, who deem’d not that the Greeks
Would stand our onset, and resistless arms!
But they, as yellow-banded wasps, or bees,
That by some rocky pass have built their nests,
Abandon not their cavern’d home, but wait
Th’ attack, and boldly for their offspring fight;
So from the gates these two, though two alone,
Retire not, till they be or ta’en or slain.”

He said: but Jove regarded not his words;
So much on Hector’s triumph he was bent.
Like battle rag’d round th’ other gates; but hard
It were for me, with godlike pow’r, to paint
Each sev’ral combat; for around the wall
A more than human storm of stone was pour’d
On ev’ry side; the Greeks, hard press’d, perforce
Fought for their ships, while all the Gods look’d on
Indignant, who the Grecian cause upheld.
Fiercely the Lapithae sustain’d the war:
Stout Polypoetes first, Pirithous’ son,
Smote, through the brass-cheek’d helmet, Damasus;
Nor stay’d the brazen helm the spear, whose point
Went crashing through the bone, that all the brain
Was shatter’d; onward as he rush’d, he fell.
Then Pylon next, and Ormenus he slew:
Meantime Leonteus, scion true of Mars,
Struck with unerring spear Hippomachus,
Son of Antimachus, below the waist;
Then, drawing from the sheath his trenchant sword,
Dash’d through the crowd, and hand to hand he smote
Antiphates; he, backward, fell to earth.
Menon, Iamenus, Orestes next,
In quick succession to the ground he brought.
From these while they their glitt’ring armour stripp’d,
Round Hector throng’d, and bold Polydamas,
The bravest and the best, who long’d the most
To storm the wall, and burn with fire the ships.
Yet on the margin of the ditch they paus’d;
For, as they sought to cross, a sign from Heav’n
Appear’d, to leftward of th’ astonish’d crowd;
A soaring eagle in his talons bore
A dragon, huge of size, of blood-red hue,
Alive, and breathing still, nor yet subdued;
For twisting backward through the breast he pierc’d
His bearer, near the neck; he, stung with pain,
Let fall his prey, which dropp’d amid the crowd;
Then screaming, on the blast was borne away.
The Trojans, shudd’ring, in their midst beheld
The spotted serpent, dire portent of Jove:
Then to bold Hector thus Polydamas:
“Hector, in council thou reprov’st me oft
For good advice; it is not meet, thou say’st,
That private men should talk beside the mark,
In council or in war, but study still
Thine honour to exalt; yet must I now
Declare what seems to me the wisest course:
Let us not fight the Greeks beside their ships;
For thus I read the future, if indeed
To us, about to cross, this sign from Heav’n
Was sent, to leftward of th’ astonish’d crowd:
A soaring eagle, bearing in his claws
A dragon, huge of size, of blood-red hue,
Alive; yet dropp’d him ere he reach’d his home,
Nor to his nestlings bore th’ intended prey:
So we, e’en though our mighty strength should break
The gates and wall, and put the Greeks to rout,
By the same road not scatheless should return,
But many a Trojan on the field should leave,
Slain by the Greeks, while they their ships defend.
So would a seer, well vers’d in augury,
Worthy of public credit, read this sign.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
Replied, with stern regard: “Polydamas,
This speech of thine is alien to my soul:
Thy better judgment better counsel knows.
But if in earnest such is thine advice,
Thee of thy senses have the Gods bereft,
Who fain wouldst have us disregard the word
And promise by the nod of Jove confirm’d,
And put our faith in birds’ expanded wings;
Little of these I reck, nor care to look,
If to the right, and tow’rd the morning sun,
Or to the left, and shades of night, they fly.
Put we our trust in Jove’s eternal will,
Of mortals and Immortals King supreme.
The best of omens is our country’s cause.
Why shouldst thou tremble at the battle strife?
Though ev’ry Trojan else were doom’d to die
Beside the ships, no fear lest thou shouldst fall:
Unwarlike is thy soul, nor firm of mood:
But if thou shrink, or by thy craven words
Turn back another Trojan from the fight,
My spear shall take the forfeit of thy life.”

This said, he led the way; with joyous shouts
They follow’d all; then Jove, the lightning’s Lord,
From Ida’s heights a storm of wind sent down,
Driving the dust against the Grecian ships;
Which quell’d their courage, and to Hector gave,
And to the Trojans, fresh incitement; they,
On their own strength, and heav’nly signs relying,
Their force address’d to storm the Grecian wall.
They raz’d the counterscarp, the battlements
Destroy’d; and the projecting buttresses,
Which, to sustain the tow’rs, the Greeks had fix’d
Deep in the soil, with levers undermin’d.
These once withdrawn, they hop’d to storm the wall;
Nor from the passage yet the Greeks withdrew,
But closely fencing with their bull’s-hide shields
The broken battlements, they thence hurl’d down
A storm of weapons on the foe beneath.
Commanding from the tow’r in ev’ry place
Were seen th’ Ajaces, urging to the fight,
Imploring these, and those in sterner tones
Rebuking, who their warlike toil relax’d.

“Friends, Grecians all, ye who excel in war,
And ye of mod’rate or inferior strength,
Though all are not with equal pow’rs endued,
Yet here is work for all! bear this in mind,
Nor tow’rd the ships let any turn his face,
By threats dismay’d; but forward press, and each
Encourage each, if so the lightning’s Lord,
Olympian Jove, may grant us to repel,
And backward to his city chase the foe.”

Thus they, with cheering words, sustain’d the war:
Thick as the snow-flakes on a wintry day,
When Jove, the Lord of counsel, down on men
His snow-storm sends, and manifests his pow’r:
Hush’d are the winds; the flakes continuous fall,
That the high mountain tops, and jutting crags,
And lotus-cover’d meads are buried deep,
And man’s productive labours of the field;
On hoary Ocean’s beach and bays they lie,
Th’ approaching waves their bound; o’er all beside
Is spread by Jove the heavy veil of snow.
So thickly new the stones from either side,
By Greeks on Trojans hurl’d, by these on Greeks;
And clatter’d loud through all its length the wall.
Nor yet the Trojans, though by Hector led,
The gates had broken, and the massive bar,
But Jove against the Greeks sent forth his son
Sarpedon, as a lion on a herd:
His shield’s broad orb before his breast he bore,
Well-wrought, of beaten brass, which th’ arm’rer’s hand
Had beaten out, and lin’d with stout bull’s-hide;
With golden rods, continuous, all around;
He thus equipp’d, two jav’lins brandishing,
Strode onward, as a lion, mountain-bred,
Whom, fasting long, his dauntless courage leads
To assail the flock, though in well-guarded fold;
And though the shepherds there he find, prepar’d
With dogs and lances to protect the sheep,
Not unattempted will he leave the fold;
But, springing to the midst, he bears his prey
In triumph thence; or in the onset falls,
Wounded by jav’lins hurl’d by stalwart hands:
So, prompted by his godlike courage, burn’d
Sarpedon to assail the lofty wall,
And storm the ramparts; and to Glaucus thus,
Son of Hippolochus, his speech address’d:

“Whence is it, Glaucus, that in Lycian land
We two at feasts the foremost seats may claim,
The largest portions, and the fullest cups?
Why held as Gods in honour? why endow’d
With ample heritage, by Xanthus’ banks,
Of vineyard, and of wheat producing land?
Then by the Lycians should we not be seen
The foremost to affront the raging fight?
So may our well-arm’d Lycians make their boast;
‘To no inglorious Kings we Lycians owe
Allegiance; they on richest viands feed;
Of luscious flavour drink the choicest wine;
But still their valour brightest shows; and they,
Where Lycians war, are foremost in the fight!’
O friend! if we, survivors of this war,
Could live, from age and death for ever free,
Thou shouldst not see me foremost in the fight,
Nor would I urge thee to the glorious field:
But since on man ten thousand forms of death
Attend, which none may ’scape, then on, that we
May glory on others gain, or they on us!”

Thus he; nor Glaucus from his bidding shrank;
And forward straight they led the Lycian pow’rs.
Menestheus, son of Peteus, with dismay
Observ’d their movement; for on his command,
Inspiring terror, their attack was made.
He look’d around him to the Grecian tow’rs,
If any chief might there be found, to save
His comrades from destruction; there he saw,
Of war insatiable, th’ Ajaces twain;
And Teucer, from the tent but newly come,
Hard by; nor yet could reach them with his voice;
Such was the din, such tumult rose to Heav’n,
From clatt’ring shields, and horsehair-crested helms,
And batter’d gates, now all at once assail’d:
Before them fiercely strove th’ assaulting bands
To break their way: he then Thootes sent,
His herald, to th’ Ajaces, craving aid.

“Haste thee, Thootes, on th’ Ajaces call,
Both, if it may be; so we best may hope
To ’scape the death, which else is near at hand;
So fierce the pressure of the Lycian chiefs,
Undaunted now, as ever, in the fight.
But if they too are hardly press’d, at least
Let Ajax, son of Telamon, be spar’d,
And with him Teucer, skilled to draw the bow.”
He said; the herald heard, and straight obey’d;
Along the wall, where stood the brass-clad Greeks,
He ran, and standing near th’ Ajaces, said:

“Ajaces, leaders of the brass-clad Greeks,
The son of Heav’n-born Peteus craves your aid.
To share awhile the labours of his guard;
Both, if it may be; so he best may hope
To ’scape the death, which else is near at hand:
So fierce the pressure of the Lycian chiefs,
Undaunted now, as ever, in the fight.
But if ye too are hardly press’d, at least
Let Ajax, son of Telamon, be spar’d,
And with him Teucer, skill’d to draw the bow.”

He said: the mighty son of Telamon
Consenting, thus addresss’d Oileus’ son:
“Ajax, do thou and valiant Lyeomede
Exhort the Greeks the struggle to maintain;
While I go yonder, to affront the war,
To aid their need, and back return in haste.”

Thus saying, Ajax Telamon set forth,
And with him Teucer went, his father’s son,
While by Pandion Teucer’s bow was borne.
At brave Menestheus’ tow’r, within the wall,
Arriv’d, sore press’d they found the garrison;
For like a whirlwind on the ramparts pour’d
The Lycians’ valiant councillors and chiefs.
They quickly join’d the fray, and loud arose
The battle-cry; first Ajax Telamon
Sarpedon’s comrade, brave Epicles, slew,
Struck by a rugged stone, within the wall
Which lay, the topmost of the parapet,
Of size prodigious; which with both his hands
A man in youth’s full vigour scarce could raise,
As men are now; he lifted it on high,
And downward hurl’d; the four-peak’d helm it broke,
Crushing the bone, and shatt’ring all the skull;
He, like a diver, from the lofty tow’r
Fell headlong down, and life forsook his bones,
Teucer, meanwhile, from off the lofty wall
The valiant Glaucus, pressing to the fight,
Struck with an arrow, where he saw his arm
Unguarded; he no longer brook’d the fray;
Back from the wall he sprang, in hopes to hide
From Grecian eyes his wound, that none might see,
And triumph o’er him with insulting words.
With grief Sarpedon saw his friend withdraw,
Yet not relax’d his efforts; Thestor’s son,
Alcmaon, with his spear he stabb’d, and back
The weapon drew; he, following, prostrate fell,
And loudly rang his arms of polish’d brass.
Then at the parapet, with stalwart hand,
Sarpedon tugg’d; and yielding to his force
Down fell the block entire; the wall laid bare,
To many at once the breach gave open way.
Ajax and Teucer him at once assail’d;
This with an arrow struck the glitt’ring belt
Around his breast, whence hung his pond’rous shield;
But Jove, who will’d not that his son should fall
Before the ships, the weapon turn’d aside.
Then forward Ajax sprang, and with his spear
Thrust at the shield; the weapon pass’d not through,
Yet check’d his bold advance; a little space
Back he recoil’d, but not the more withdrew,
His soul on glory intent; and rallying quick,
Thus to the warlike Lycians shouted loud:

“Why, Lycians, thus your wonted might relax?
’Tis hard for one alone, how brave soe’er,
E’en though he break the rampart down, to force
A passage to the ships; but on with me!
For work is here for many hands to do.”

He said; and by the King’s rebuke abash’d,
With fiercer zeal the Lycians press’d around
Their King and councillor; on th’ other side
Within the wall the Greeks their squadrons mass’d;
Then were great deeds achiev’d; nor thro’ the breach
Could the brave troops of Lycia to the ships
Their passage force; nor could the warrior Greeks
Repel the Lycians from the ground, where they,
Before the wall, had made their footing good.
As when two neighbours, in a common field,
Each line in hand, within a narrow space,
About the limits of their land contend;
Between them thus the rampart drew the line;
O’er which the full-orb’d shields of tough bull’s-hide,
And lighter bucklers on the warriors’ breasts
On either side they clove; and many a wound
The pitiless weapons dealt, on some who, turn’d,
Their neck and back laid bare; on many more,
Who full in front, and through their shields were struck.
On ev’ry side the parapet and tow’rs
With Greek and Trojan blood were spatter’d o’er.
Nor yet, e’en so, the Greeks to flight were driv’n;
But as a woman that for wages spins,
Honest and true, with wool and weights in hand,
In even balance holds the scales, to mete
Her humble hire, her children’s maintenance;
So even hung the balance of the war,
Till Jove with highest honour Hector crown’d,
The son of Priam; he, the foremost, scal’d
The wall, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:

“On, valiant Trojans, on! the Grecian wall
Break down, and wrap their ships in blazing fires.”

Thus he, exhorting, spoke; they heard him all,
And to the wall rush’d numberless, and swarm’d
Upon the ramparts, bristling thick with spears.
Then Hector, stooping, seiz’d a pond’rous stone
That lay before the gates; ’twas broad below,
But sharp above; and scarce two lab’ring men,
The strongest, from the ground could raise it up,
And load upon a wain; as men are now;
But he unaided lifted it with ease,
So light it seem’d, by grace of Saturn’s son.
As in one hand a shepherd bears with ease
A full-siz’d fleece, and scarcely feels the weight;
So Hector tow’rd the portals bore the stone,
Which clos’d the lofty double-folding gates,
Within defended by two massive bars
Laid crosswise, and with one cross bolt secur’d.
Close to the gate he stood; and planting firm
His foot, to give his arm its utmost pow’r,
Full on the middle dash’d the mighty mass.
The hinges both gave way; the pond’rous stone
Fell inwards; widely gap’d the op’ning gates;
Nor might the bars within the blow sustain:
This way and that the sever’d portals flew
Before the crashing missile; dark as night
His low’ring brow, great Hector sprang within;
Bright flash’d the brazen armour on his breast,
As through the gates, two jav’lins in his hand,
He sprang; the Gods except, no pow’r might meet
That onset; blaz’d his eyes with lurid fire.
Then to the Trojans, turning to the throng,
He call’d aloud to scale the lofty wall;
They heard, and straight obey’d; some scal’d the wall:
Some through the strong-built gates continuous pour’d;
While in confusion irretrievable
Fled to their ships the panic-stricken Greeks.



ARGUMENT.

THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS. THE
ACTS OF IDOMENEUS.


Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector (who had entered the gate near the
station of the Ajaces), assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires
those heroes to oppose him; then, in the form of one of the generals,
encourages the other Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The
Ajaces form their troops into a close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector
and the Trojans. Several deeds of valour are performed; Meriones,
losing his spear in the encounter, repairs to seek another at the tent
of Idomeneus; this occasions a conversation between these two warriors,
who return together to the battle. Idomeneus signalizes his courage
above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and Alcathous; Deiphobus
and Æneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus retires. Menelaus
wounds Helenus and kills Peisander. The Trojans are repulsed in the
left wing. Hector still keeps his ground against the Ajaces, till,
being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas advises to
call a council of war: Hector approves his advice, but goes first to
rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax again,
and renews the attack.

The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the
Grecian wall and the sea-shore.

BOOK XIII.

When Jove had Hector and the Trojans brought
Close to the ships, he left them there to toil
And strife continuous; turning his keen glance
To view far off th’ equestrian tribes of Thrace,
The warlike Mysians, and the men who feed
On milk of mares, thence Hippemolgi term’d;
A peaceful race, the justest of mankind.
On Troy he turn’d not once his piercing glance;
Nor deem’d he any God would dare to give
To Trojans or to Greeks his active aid.

No careless watch the monarch Neptune kept:
Wond’ring, he view’d the battle, where he sat
Aloft on wooded Samos’ topmost peak,
Samos of Thrace; whence Ida’s heights he saw,
And Priam’s city, and the ships of Greece.

Thither ascended from the sea, he sat;
And thence the Greeks, by Trojans overborne,
Pitying he saw, and deeply wroth with Jove.
Then down the mountain’s craggy side he pass’d
With rapid step; and as he mov’d along,
Beneath th’ immortal feet of Ocean’s Lord
Quak’d the huge mountain and the shadowy wood.
Three strides he took; the fourth, he reach’d his goal,
Ægae; where on the margin of the bay
His temple stood, all glitt’ring, all of gold,
Imperishable; there arriv’d, he yok’d
Beneath his car the brazen-footed steeds,
Of swiftest flight, with manes of flowing gold.
All clad in gold, the golden lash he grasp’d
Of curious work, and mounting on his car,
Skimm’d o’er the waves; from all the depths below
Gamboll’d around the monsters of the deep,
Acknowledging their King; the joyous sea
Parted her waves; swift flew the bounding steeds,
Nor was the brazen axle wet with spray,
When to the ships of Greece their Lord they bore.

Down in the deep recesses of the sea
A spacious cave there is, which lies midway
’Twixt Tenedos and Imbros’ rocky isle:
Th’ Earth-shaking Neptune there his coursers stay’d,
Loos’d from the chariot, and before them plac’d
Ambrosial provender; and round their feet
Shackles of gold, which none might break nor loose,
That there they might await their Lord’s return;
Then to the Grecian army took his way.

Meantime, by Hector, son of Priam, led,
Like fire, or whirlwind, press’d the Trojans on,
With furious zeal, and shouts and clamour hoarse;
In hopes to take the ships, and all the chiefs
To slay beside them; but from Ocean’s depths
Uprose th’ Earth-shaker, Circler of the Earth,
To Calchas’ likeness and deep voice conform’d,
And rous’d the fainting Greeks; th’ Ajaces first,
Themselves with ardour fill’d, he thus address’d:
“’Tis yours, Ajaces, fill’d with courage high,
Discarding chilly fear, to save the Greeks:
Elsewhere I dread not much the Trojan force,
Though they in crowds have scal’d the lofty wall;
The well-greav’d Greeks their onset may defy.
Yet greatly fear I lest we suffer loss,
Where that fierce, fiery madman, Hector, leads.
Who boasts himself the son of Jove most high.
But may some God your hearts inspire, yourselves
Firmly to stand, and cheer your comrades on;
So from your swiftly-sailing ships ye yet
May drive the foe, how bold soe’er he be,
Though by Olympian Jove himself upheld.”

So spake th’ Earth-shaker, Circler of the Earth,
And with his sceptre touching both the chiefs,
Fill’d them with strength and courage, and their limbs,
Their feet and hands, with active vigour strung;
Then like a swift-wing’d falcon sprang to flight,
Which down the sheer face of some lofty rock
Swoops on the plain to seize his feather’d prey:
So swiftly Neptune left the chiefs; him first
Departing, knew Oileus’ active son,
And thus the son of Telamon address’d:
“Ajax, since some one of th’ Olympian Gods,
In likeness of a seer, hath hither come
To urge us to the war (no Calchas he,
Our augur Heav’n-inspir’d; for well I mark’d
His movements, as he went; and of a God
’Tis easy to discern the outward signs),
I feel fresh spirit kindled in my breast,
And new-born vigour in my feet and hands.”

Whom answer’d thus the son of Telamon:
“My hands too grasp with firmer hold the spear,
My spirit like thine is stirr’d; I feel my feet
Instinct with fiery life; nor should I fear
With Hector, son of Priam, in his might
Alone to meet, and grapple to the death.”

Such was their mutual converse, as they joy’d
In the fierce transport by the God inspir’d.
Neptune, meanwhile, the other Greeks arous’d,
Who, to the ships withdrawn, their wasted strength
Recruited; for their limbs were faint with toil,
And grief was in their hearts, as they beheld
The Trojan hosts that scal’d the lofty wall;
They saw, and from their eyes the teardrops fell,
Of safety desp’rate; but th’ Earth-shaking God
Amid their ranks appearing, soon restor’d
Their firm array; to Teucer first he came,
To Leitus, and valiant Peneleus,
Thoas, Deipyrus, Meriones,
And young Antilochus, brave warriors all,
And to the chiefs his winged words address’d:

“Shame on ye, Grecian youths! to you I look’d
As to our ships’ defenders; but if ye
Shrink from the perilous battle, then indeed
Our day is come, to be by Troy subdu’d.
O Heav’n! a sad and wondrous sight is this,
A sight I never deem’d my eyes should see,
Our ships assail’d by Trojan troops; by those
Who heretofore have been as tim’rous hinds
Amid the forest depths, the helpless prey
Of jackals, pards, and wolves; they here and there,
Uncertain, heartless, unresisting, fly:
Such were the Trojans once; nor dar’d abide,
No, not an hour, the strength and arms of Greece;
And these are they, who now beside our ships,
Far from their city walls, maintain the fight,
Embolden’d by our great commander’s fault,
And slackness of the people, who, with him
Offended, scarce are brought to guard our ships.
And, feebly fighting, are beside them slain.
E’en though the mighty monarch, Atreus’ son,
Wide-ruling Agamemnon, be in truth
Wholly to blame in this, that he hath wrong’d
The son of Peleus, yet ’tis not for us
Our courage to relax. Arouse ye then!
A brave man’s spirit its vigour soon regains.
That ye, the best and bravest of the host,
Should stand aloof thus idly, ’tis not well;
If meaner men should from the battle shrink,
I might not blame them; but that such as ye
Should falter, indignation fills my soul.
Dear friends, from this remissness must accrue
Yet greater evils; but with gen’rous shame
And keen remorse let each man’s breast be fill’d;
Fierce is the struggle; in his pride of strength
Hector has forc’d the gates and massive bars,
And raging, ’mid the ships maintains the war.”

Thus Neptune on the Greeks, reproving, call’d:
Then round th’ Ajaces twain were cluster’d thick
The serried files, whose firm array nor Mars,
Nor spirit-stirring Pallas might reprove:
For there, the bravest all, in order due,
Waited the Trojan charge by Hector led:
Spear close by spear, and shield by shield o’erlaid,
Buckler to buckler press’d, and helm to helm,
And man to man; the horsehair plumes above,
That nodded on the warriors’ glitt’ring crests,
Each other touch’d; so closely massed they stood.
Backward, by many a stalwart hand, were drawn
The spears, in act to hurl; their eyes and minds
Turn’d to the front, and eager for the fray.
On pour’d the Trojan masses; in the van
Hector straight forward urg’d his furious course.
As some huge boulder, from its rocky bed
Detach’d, and by the wintry torrent’s force
Hurl’d down the cliff’s steep face, when constant rains
The massive rock’s firm hold have undermin’d;
With giant bounds it flies; the crashing wood
Resounds beneath it; still it hurries on,
Until, arriving at the level plain,
Its headlong impulse check’d, it rolls no more;
So Hector, threat’ning now through ships and tents,
E’en to the sea, to force his murd’rous way,
Anon, confronted by that phalanx firm,
Halts close before it; while the sons of Greece,
With thrust of sword and double-pointed spears,
Stave off his onset; he a little space
Withdrew, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:

“Trojans, and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, stand ye firm! not long
The Greeks, though densely mass’d, shall bar my way,
But soon, methinks, before my spear shall quail,
If from the chief of Gods my mission be,
From Jove the Thund’rer, royal Juno’s Lord.”

His words fresh courage rais’d in ev’ry breast;
On loftiest deeds intent, Deiphobus,
The son of Priam, from the foremost ranks,
His shield’s broad orb before him borne, advanc’d
With airy step, protected by the shield:
At him Meriones with glitt’ring spear
Took aim, nor miss’d his mark; the shield’s broad orb
Of tough bull’s-hide it struck; but pass’d not through,
For near the head the sturdy shaft was snapp’d.
Yet from before his breast Deiphobus
Held at arm’s length his shield; for much he fear’d
The weapon of Meriones; but he
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks withdrew,
Griev’d at his baffled hopes and broken spear.
Then tow’rd the ships he bent his steps, to seek
Another spear, which in his tent remain’d.
The rest, ’mid wild uproar, maintain’d the fight.

There Teucer first, the son of Telamon,
A warrior slew, the son of Mentor, Lord
Of num’rous horses, Imbrius, spearman skill’d.
In former days, ere came the sons of Greece,
He in Pedaeus dwelt, and had to wife
Medesicaste, Priam’s bastard child;
But when the well-trimm’d ships of Greece appear’d,
Return’d to Troy; and there, rever’d by all,
With Priam dwelt, who lov’d him as a son.
Him Teucer with his lance below the ear
Stabb’d, and drew back the weapon; down he fell,
As by the woodman’s axe, on some high peak,
Falls a proud ash, conspicuous from afar,
Scatt’ring its tender foliage on the ground;
He fell; and loud his burnish’d armour rang.
Forth Teucer sprang to seize the spoil; at whom,
Advancing, Hector aim’d his glitt’ring spear;
He saw, and, stooping, shunn’d the brazen death
A little space; but through the breast it struck
Amphimachus, the son of Cteatus,
The son of Actor, hastening to the fight:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Then forward Hector sprang, in hopes to seize
The brazen helm, that fitted well the brow
Of brave Amphimachus; but Ajax met
Th’ advance of Hector with his glitt’ring spear;
Himself he reach’d not, all in dazzling brass
Encas’d; but pressing on his bossy shield
Drove by main force beyond where lay the dead:
Them both the Greeks withdrew; th’ Athenian chiefs
Stychius and brave Menestheus, bore away
Amid the ranks of Greece Amphimachus;
While, as two lions high above the ground
Bear through the brushwood in their jaws a goat,
Snatch’d from the sharp-fang’d dogs’ protecting care:
So, fill’d with warlike rage, th’ Ajaces twain
Lifted on high, and of its armour stripp’d
The corpse of Imbrius; and Oileus’ son,
Griev’d at Amphimachus, his comrade’s death,
Cut from the tender neck, and like a ball
Sent whirling through the crowd the sever’d head;
And in the dust at Hector’s feet it fell.
Then, for his grandson slain, fierce anger fill’d
The breast of Neptune; through the tents of Greece
And ships he pass’d, the Greeks encouraging,
And ills preparing for the sons of Troy.
Him met Idomeneus, the warrior King,
Leaving a comrade, from the battle field,
Wounded behind the knee, but newly brought;
Borne by his comrades, to the leech’s care
He left him, eager to rejoin the fray;
Whom by his tent th’ Earth-shaking God address’d,
The voice assuming of Andraemon’s son,
Who o’er th’ Ætolians, as a God rever’d,
In Pleuron reign’d, and lofty Calydon:

“Where now, Idomeneus, sage Cretan chief,
Are all the vaunting threats, so freely pour’d
Against the Trojans by the sons of Greece?”

To whom the Cretan King, Idomeneus:
“Thoas, on none, so far as I may judge,
May blame be cast; we all our duties know;
Nor see I one by heartless fear restrain’d,
Nor hanging back, and flinching from the war:
Yet by th’ o’erruling will of Saturn’s son
It seems decreed that here the Greeks should fall,
And far from Argos lie in nameless graves.
But, Thoas, as thyself art ever staunch,
Nor slow the laggards to reprove, thy work
Remit not now; but rouse each sev’ral man.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Idomeneus, may he from Troy return
No more, but here remain to glut the dogs,
If such there be, from this day’s fight who shrinks.
But haste thee, don thine arms; great need is now
To hasten, if in aught we two may serve:
E’en meaner men, united, courage gain;
But we the bravest need not fear to meet.”

He said, and to the strife of men return’d.
Within his well-constructed tent arriv’d,
Straight donn’d Idomeneus his armour bright:
Two spears he took; and, like the lightning’s flash,
Which, as a sign to men, the hand of Jove
Hurls downwards from Olympus’ glitt’ring heights;
Whose dazzling radiance far around is thrown;
Flash’d, as the warrior ran, his armour bright.
Him met Meriones, his follower brave,
Close to the tent; to seek a spear he came;
To whom Idomeneus: “Meriones,
Swift-footed son of Molus, comrade dear,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle field?
Hast thou some wound receiv’d, whereof the pain
Subdues thy spirit? or com’st thou, to the field
To summon me? unsummon’d, well thou know’st
I better love the battle than the tent.”

Whom answer’d thus the sage Meriones:
“Idomeneus, the brass-clad Cretans’ King,
I come to seek a spear, if haply such
Within thy tent be found; for, in the fight,
That which I lately bore, e’en now I broke
Against the shield of brave Deiphobus.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan King:
“Of spears, or one, or twenty, if thou list,
Thou there mayst find against the polish’d wall.
The spoil of Trojans slain; for with my foes
’Tis not my wont to wage a distant war.
Thence have I store of spears, and bossy shields,
And crested helms, and breastplates polish’d bright.”

Whom answer’d thus the sage Meriones:
“Nor are my tent and dark-ribb’d ship devoid
Of Trojan spoils; but they are far to seek;
Nor deem I that my hand is slack in fight;
For ’mid the foremost in the glorious strife
I stand, whene’er is heard the battle cry.
My deeds by others of the brass-clad Greeks
May not be noted; but thou know’st them well.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan King:
“What need of this? thy prowess well I know;
For should we choose our bravest through the fleet
To man the secret ambush, surest test
Of warriors’ courage, where is manifest
The diff’rence ’twixt the coward and the brave;
(The coward’s colour changes, nor his soul
Within his breast its even balance keeps,
But changing still, from foot to foot he shifts,
And in his bosom loudly beats his heart,
Expecting death; and chatter all his teeth:
The brave man’s colour changes not; no fear
He knows, the ambush ent’ring; all his pray’r
Is that the hour of battle soon may come)
E’en there, thy courage none might call in doubt.
Shouldst thou from spear or sword receive a wound,
Not on thy neck behind, nor on thy back
Would fall the blow, but on thy breast, in front,
Still pressing onward ’mid the foremost ranks.
But come, prolong we not this idle talk,
Like babblers vain, who scorn might justly move:
Haste to my tent, and there select thy spear.”

He said: and from the tent Meriones,
Valiant as Mars, his spear selected straight,
And, eager for the fray, rejoin’d his chief.
As Mars, the bane of men, goes forth to war,
Attended by his strong, unfearing son,
Terror, who shakes the bravest warrior’s soul;
They two, from Thrace, against the Ephyri,
Or haughty Phlegyans arm; nor hear alike
The pray’rs of both the combatants, one side
With vict’ry crowning; so to battle went
Those leaders twain, in dazzling arms array’d:
Then thus Meriones his chief address’d:

“Son of Deucalion, say if on the right,
Or on the centre of the gen’ral host,
Our onset should be made, or on the left;
For there, methinks, most succour need the Greeks.”

To whom Idomeneus, the Cretan chief:
“Others there are the centre to defend,
Th’ Ajaces both, and Teucer, of the Greeks
Best archer, good too in the standing fight;
These may for Hector full employment find,
Brave as he is, and eager for the fray;
E’en for his courage ’twere a task too hard,
Their might to conquer, and resistless hands,
And burn the ships, if Saturn’s son himself
Fire not, and ’mid the shipping throw the torch.
Great Ajax Telamon to none would yield,
Of mortal birth, by earthly food sustain’d,
By spear or pond’rous stone assailable;
In hand to hand encounter, scarce surpass’d
By Peleus’ son Achilles; though with him
In speed of foot he might not hope to vie.
Then on the left let us our onset make;
And quickly learn if we on others’ heads
Are doom’d to win renown, or they on ours.”

He said: and, brave as Mars, Meriones,
Thither where he directed, led the way.
Now when, attended thus, Idomeneus,
Like blazing fire, in dazzling arms appear’d,
Around him throng’d, with rallying cries, the Greeks,
And rag’d beside the ships the balanc’d fight.
As, when the dust lies deepest on the roads,
Before the boist’rous winds the storm drives fast,
And high at once the whirling clouds are toss’d;
So was the fight confus’d; and in the throng
Each man with keen desire of slaughter burn’d.
Bristled the deadly strife with pond’rous spears,
Wielded with dire intent; the brazen gleam
Dazzled the sight, by flashing helmets cast,
And breastplates polish’d bright, and glitt’ring shields
Commingling; stern of heart indeed were he,
Who on that sight with joy, not pain, could gaze.

Dire evil then on mortal warriors brought
The diverse minds of Saturn’s mighty sons:
To Hector and the Trojans Jove design’d,
In honour of Achilles, swift of foot,
To give the vict’ry; yet not utterly
He will’d to slay before the walls of Troy
The Grecian host; but glory to confer
On Thetis and her noble-minded son.
Neptune, on th’ other side, the Greeks inspir’d,
Clandestine rising from the hoary sea;
For them before the Trojan host o’erborne
He saw with grief, and deeply wroth with Jove.
Equal the rank of both, their birth the same,
But Jove in wisdom, as in years, the first.
Nor ventur’d Neptune openly to aid
The cause of Greece; but cloth’d in mortal form,
In secret still the army’s courage rous’d.
This way and that they tugg’d of furious war
And balanc’d strife, where many a warrior fell,
The straining rope, which none might break or loose.
Then, though his hair was grizzl’d o’er with age,
Calling the Greeks to aid, Idomeneus,
Inspiring terror, on the Trojans sprang,
And slew Othryoneus, who but of late
Came from Cabesus on the alarm of war;
And, welcomed as a guest in Priam’s house,
The fairest of his daughters sought to wed,
No portion asked, Cassandra; mighty deeds
He promis’d, from before the walls of Troy
In their despite to drive the sons of Greece.
The aged Priam listen’d to his snit;
And he, his promise trusting, fought for Troy.
Him, marching with proud step, Idomeneus
Struck with his glitt’ring spear, nor aught avail’d
His brazen breastplate; through the middle thrust,
Thund’ring he fell: the victor vaunting cried:

“Othryoneus, above all mortal men
I hold thee in respect, if thou indeed
Wilt make thy words to aged Priam good,
Who promis’d thee his daughter in return:
We too would offer thee a like reward;
And give thee here to wed, from Argos brought,
Atrides’ fairest daughter, if with us
Thou wilt o’erthrow the well-built walls of Troy.
Come then, on board our ocean-going ships
Discuss the marriage contract; nor shall we
Be found illib’ral of our bridal gifts.”

He said, and seizing by the foot the slain,
Dragg’d from the press; but to the rescue came
Asius, himself on foot before his car:
So close his charioteer the horses held,
They breath’d upon his shoulders; eagerly
He sought to reach Idomeneus; but he,
Preventing, through his gullet drove the spear,
Beneath his chin; right through the weapon pass’d;
He fell; as falls an oak, or poplar tall,
Or lofty pine, which on the mountain top,
For some proud ship, the woodman’s axe hath hewn:
So he, before the car and horses stretch’d,
His death-cry utt’ring, clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil;
Bewilder’d, helpless, stood his charioteer;
Nor dar’d, escaping from the foemen’s hands,
To turn his horses: him, Antilochus
Beneath the waistband struck; nor aught avail’d
His brazen breastplate; through the middle thrust,
He, from the well-wrought chariot, gasping, fell.
Antilochus, the noble Nestor’s son,
The horses seiz’d, and from the Trojan ranks
Drove to the Grecian camp. For Asius’ death
Deep griev’d, Deiphobus, approaching, hurl’d
Against Idomeneus his glitt’ring spear:
The coming weapon he beheld, and shunn’d:
Beneath the ample circle of his shield,
With hides and brazen plates encircled round,
And by two rods sustain’d, conceal’d he stood:
Beneath he crouch’d, and o’er him flew the spear:
Yet harsh it grated, glancing from the shield;
Nor bootless from that stalwart hand it flew,
But through the midriff, close below the heart,
Hypsenor, son of Hippasus, it struck,
And straight relax’d his limbs; then shouting loud,
In boastful tone, Deiphobus exclaim’d:

“Not unaveng’d lies Asius; he, methinks,
As I have found him fellowship, with joy
Thro’ Hades’ strongly-guarded gates may pass.”
He said; the Greeks, indignant, heard his boast;
Chief, of Antilochus the manly soul
Was stirr’d within him; yet amid his grief
His comrade not forgetting, up he ran,
And o’er him spread the cover of his shield.
Meanwhile, two trusty friends, Mecistheus, son
Of Echius, and Alastor, rais’d the slain,
And deeply groaning bore him to the ships.
Nor did Idomeneus his noble rage
Abate; still burning o’er some Trojan soul
To draw the gloomy veil of night and death;
Or, having sav’d the Greeks, himself to fall.
Then high-born Æsuetes’ son he slew,
Alcathous; he, Anchises’ son-in-law,
The eldest of his daughters had to wife,
Hippodamia; by her parents both,
O’er all, belov’d; in beauty, skill, and mind,
All her compeers surpassing; wife of one,
The noblest man through all the breadth of Troy.
Him Neptune by Idomeneus subdued;
Seal’d his quick eyes, his active limbs restrain’d,
Without the pow’r to fly, or shun the spear;
Fix’d as a pillar, or a lofty tree,
He stood, while through his breast Idomeneus
His weapon drove; the brazen mail it broke,
Which oft had turn’d aside the stroke of death;
Harshly it grated, sever’d by the spear:
He fell; the spear-point quiv’ring in his heart,
Which with convulsive throbbings shook the shaft.
There Mars its course arrested. Then with shouts
Of triumph, vaunting, thus Idomeneus:

“How now, Deiphobus? are three for one
An equal balance? where are now thy boasts?
Come forth, my friend, thyself to me oppos’d;
And learn, if here, unworthy my descent
From Jove, my great progenitor, I stand.
He Minos, guardian chief of Crete, begot;
Noble Deucalion was to Minos born,
I to Deucalion; far extends my rule
In wide-spread Crete; whom now our ships have brought,
A bane to thee, thy sire, and Trojans all.”

He said; and doubtful stood Deiphobus,
Or to retreat, and summon to his aid
The Trojans, or alone the venture try.
Thus as he mus’d, the wiser course appear’d
To seek Æneas; him he found apart,
Behind the crowd; for he was still at feud
With godlike Priam, who, he thought, withheld
The public honour to his valour due.
To whom Deiphobus, approaching, thus:

“Æneas, sagest councillor of Troy,
Behoves thee now, if rev’rence for the dead
Can move thy soul, thy sister’s husband aid:
Haste we to save Alcathous; who of old,
When thou wast little, in thy father’s house,
Nurs’d thee with tender care; for him, but now,
The spear-renown’d Idomeneus hath slain.”

He said; Æneas’ spirit was rous’d, and fill’d
With martial rage he sought Idomeneus.
Nor, cowardlike, did he th’ encounter shun;
But firmly stood, as stands a mountain-boar
Self-confident, that in some lonely spot
Awaits the clam’rous chase; bristles his back;
His eyes with fire are flashing; and his tusks
He whets, on men and dogs prepar’d to rush:
So stood the spear-renown’d Idomeneus,
The onset of Æneas, swift in fight,
Awaiting; and the friends he saw around
He summon’d to his aid; Ascalaphus,
Deipyrus, and brave Meriones,
Antilochus and Aphareus; to these,
Tried warriors all, he thus addressed his speech:

“Aid me, my friends! alone I stand, and dread
The onset of Æneas, swift of foot.
Mighty to slay in battle; and the bloom
Of youth is his, the crown of human strength;
If, as our spirit, our years were but the same,
Great glory now should he, or I, obtain.”
He said; and, one in heart, their bucklers slop’d
Upon their shoulders, all beside him stood.

On th’ other side, Æneas to his aid
Summon’d his brother chiefs, Deiphobus,
And Paris, and Agenor; following whom
Came on the gen’ral crowd; as flocks of sheep
From pasture follow to their drinking-place
The lordly ram; well pleas’d the shepherd sees;
So pleas’d, Æneas saw the gath’ring crowd.
Then o’er Alcathous hand to hand was wag’d
The war of spears; dire was the clash of brass
Upon the heroes’ breasts, as ’mid the press
Each aim’d at other; proudly eminent
Stood forth two mighty warriors, terrible
As Mars, Æneas and Idomeneus,
Their sharp spears wielding each at other’s life.
First at Idomeneus Æneas threw
His spear; he saw, and shunn’d the brazen point;
And vainly from his stalwart hand dismiss’d,
Æneas’ spear stood quiv’ring in the ground.
Idomeneus in front, below the waist,
Œnomaus struck; the weighty spear broke through
The hollow breastplate, and th’ intestines tore;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
Forthwith Idomeneus from out the corpse
The pond’rous spear withdrew; yet could not strip
His armour off; so thickly flew the spears.
Nor did his feet retain their youthful force,
His weapon to regain, or back to spring.
Skill’d in the standing fight his life to guard,
He lack’d the active pow’r of swift retreat.
At him, retiring slow, Deiphobus,
Still fill’d with anger, threw his glitt’ring spear:
His aim he miss’d; but through the shoulder pierc’d
Ascalaphus, a valiant son of Mars;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
Nor knew the loud-voic’d, mighty God of War
That in the stubborn fight his son had fall’n;
On high Olympus, girt with golden clouds,
He sat, amid th’ Immortals all, restrain’d,
By Jove’s commands, from mingling in the war.
How hand to hand around Ascalaphus
Rag’d the fierce conflict: first Deiphobus
From off his head the glitt’ring helmet tore;
But, terrible as Mars, Meriones
Sprang forth, and pierc’d his arm; and from his hand
With hollow sound the crested helmet fell.
On, like a vulture, sprang Meriones,
And from his arm the sturdy spear withdrew;
Then backward leap’d amid his comrades’ ranks;
While round his brother’s waist Polites threw
His arms, and led him from the battle-field
To where, with charioteer and rich-wrought car,
Beyond the fight, his flying coursers stood.
Him, rack’d with pain, and groaning, while the blood
Stream’d down his wounded arm, to Troy they bore.
The rest fought on, and loud the tumult rose.

Æneas through the throat of Aphareus,
Caletor’s son, turn’d sideways tow’rds him, drove
His glitt’ring spear; and down on th’ other side,
His shield and helmet following, sank his head;
And o’er his eyes were cast the shades of death.
As Thoon turn’d, Antilochus, who watch’d
Th’ occasion, forward sprang, and with his spear
Ripp’d all the flesh that lay along the spine
Up to the neck; he backward fell, with hands
Uplifted calling for his comrades’ aid:
But forward sprang Antilochus, and tore
His armour from his breast, while round he cast
His watchful glances; for on ev’ry side
On his broad shield the Trojans show’r’d their blows,
But touch’d him not; for Neptune, ’mid the throng
Of weapons, threw his guard o’er Nestor’s son.
Yet not aloof he stood, but in their midst,
Commingled; nor held motionless his spear;
But ever threat’ning, turn’d from side to side,
Prepar’d to hurl, or hand to hand engage.
Him Adamas, the son of Asius, marked,
As o’er the crowd he glanc’d; and springing forth,
Struck with his spear the centre of the shield;
But dark-hair’d Neptune grudg’d the hero’s life,
And stay’d the brazen point; half in the shield,
Like a fire-harden’d stake, remained infix’d,
The other half lay broken, on the ground.
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks he sprang,
In hope of safety; but Meriones,
Quick-following, plung’d his weapon through his groin,
Where sharpest agony to wretched men
Attends on death; there planted he his spear:
Around the shaft he writh’d, and gasping groan’d,
Like to a mountain bull, which, bound with cords,
The herdsmen drag along, with struggles vain,
Resisting; so the wounded warrior groan’d:
But not for long: for fierce Meriones,
Approaching, from his body tore the spear,
And the dark shades of death his eyes o’erspread.
Then Helenus, a weighty Thracian sword
Wielding aloft, across the temples smote
Deipyrus, and all his helmet crash’d;
Which, as it roll’d beneath their feet, some Greek
Seiz’d ’mid the press; his eyes were clos’d in death.
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
With grief beheld; and royal Helenus
With threat’ning mien approaching, pois’d on high
His glitt’ring spear, while he the bowstring drew.
Then simultaneous flew from either side
The gleaming spear, and arrow from the string.
The shaft of Priam’s son below the breast
The hollow cuirass struck, and bounded off;
As bound the dark-skinn’d beans, or clatt’ring peas,
From the broad fan upon the threshing-floor,
By the brisk breeze impell’d, and winnower’s force;
From noble Menelaus’ cuirass so
The stinging arrow bounding, glanc’d afar.
But valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Transfix’d the hand that held the polish’d bow:
The brazen point pass’d through, and to the bow
The hand was pinn’d; back to his comrades’ ranks
He sprang, in hope of safety, hanging down
The wounded limb, that trail’d the ashen spear.
Agenor from the wound the spear withdrew,
And with a twisted sling of woollen cloth,
By an attendant brought, bound up the hand.
To noble Menelaus stood oppos’d
Peisander, to the confines dark of death
Led by his evil fate, by thee to fall,
Great son of Atreus, in the deadly strife.
When near they drew, Atrides miss’d his aim,
With erring spear divergent; next his shield
Peisander struck, but drove not through the spear;
For the broad shield resisted, and the shaft
Was snapp’d in sunder: Menelaus saw
Rejoicing, and with hope of triumph flush’d;
Unsheathing then his silver-studded sword
Rush’d on Peisander; he beneath his shield
Drew forth a pond’rous brazen battle-axe,
With handle long, of polish’d olive-wood:
And both at once in deadly combat join’d.
Then, just below the plume, Peisander struck
The crested helmet’s peak; but Atreus’ son
Met him advancing, and across the brow
Smote him, above the nose; loud crash’d the bone,
And in the dust the gory eyeballs dropp’d
Before him; doubled with the pain, he fell:
The victor, planting on his chest his foot,
Stripp’d off his arms, and thus exulting cried:
“Thus shall ye all, insatiate of the fight,
Proud Trojans, from before our ships depart;
Nor lack your share of insult and of wrong,
Such as on me, vile hounds, ye cast erewhile,
Nor fear’d th’ avenger of the slighted laws
Of hospitality, high thund’ring Jove,
Who soon your lofty city shall o’erthrow.
Kindly receiv’d, my virgin-wedded wife,
With store of goods, ye basely bore away;
And now ye rage, infuriate, to destroy
With fire our ocean-going ships, and slay
Our Grecian heroes; but the time shall come
When ye too fain would from the war escape.
O Father Jove, ’tis said that thou excell’st,
In wisdom, Gods and men; all human things
From thee proceed; and can it be, that thou
With favour seest these men of violence,
These Trojans, with presumptuous courage fill’d,
Whose rage for the battle knows nor stint nor bound?
Men are with all things sated; sleep and love;
Sweet sounds of music, and the joyous dance.
Of these may some more gladly take their fill;
But Trojans still for war, instiate, thirst.”

Thus Menelaus; and the blood-stained arms
Stripp’d from the corpse, and to his comrades gave;
Then join’d again the foremost in the fray.
There to th’ encounter forth Harpalion sprang,
Son of the King Pylaemenes, who came,
His father following, to the war of Troy,
But back return’d not to his native land.
He standing near, full in the centre struck
Atrides’ shield, but drove not through the spear;
Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks he sprang
In hopes of safety, glancing all around,
His body to defend; but as he turn’d,
In his right flank a brazen-pointed shaft,
Shot by Meriones, was buried deep:
Beneath the bone it pass’d, and pierc’d him through.
At once he fell; and gasping out his life,
Amid his comrades, writhing on the ground
Like a crush’d worm he lay; and from the wound
The dark blood pouring, drench’d the thirsty soil.

The valiant troops of Paphlagonia clos’d
Around him; on his car they plac’d the slain.
And deeply sorrowing, to the city bore;
His father, weeping, walk’d beside the car,[4]
Nor vengeance for his slaughter’d son obtain’d.
Paris with grief and anger saw him fall:
For he in former days his guest had been
In Paphlagonia; then, with anger fill’d,
A brass-tipp’d arrow from his bow he sent.

A certain man there was, Euchenor nam’d,
Who dwelt in Corinth; rich, of blameless life,
The son of Polyeidus, skilful seer:
His fate well knowing, he embark’d; for oft
The good old man had told him that his doom
Was, or at home by sharp disease to die,
Or with the Greeks by Trojan hands to fall.
Embarking, he escap’d alike the fine
By Greeks impos’d, and pangs of sharp disease.
Him Paris smote between the ear and jaw;
Swift fled his spirit, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
Thus rag’d, like blazing fire, the furious fight.

But nought as yet had Hector heard, nor knew
How sorely, leftward of the ships, were press’d
The Trojans by the Greeks; and now appear’d
Their triumph, sure; such succour Neptune gave,
Their courage rousing, and imparting strength.
But there he kept, where first the serried ranks
Of Greeks he broke, and storm’d the wall and gates;
There beach’d beside the hoary sea, the ships
Of Ajax and Protesilaus lay;
There had the wall been lowest built; and there
Were gather’d in defence the chiefest all,
Horses and men: the stout Bœotians there,
Join’d to th’ Ionians with their flowing robes,
Loerians, and Phthians, and Epeians proud,
Could scarce protect their ships; nor could repel
Th’ impetuous fire of godlike Hector’s charge.
There too the choicest troops of Athens fought;
Their chief, Menestheus, Peteus’ son; with whom
Were Pheidas, Stichius, Bias in command;
Th’ Epeians Meges, Phyleus’ son, obey’d,
And Dracius and Amphion; Medon next,
With brave Podarces led the Phthian host:
Medon, the great Oileus’ bastard son,
Brother of Ajax; he in Phylace,
Far from his native land, was driv’n to dwell,
Since one to Eriopis near akin,
His sire Oileus’ wife, his hand had slain.
Podarces from Iphiclus claim’d his birth,
The son of Phylacus; these two in arms
The valiant Phthians leading to the fight,
Join’d the Bœotian troops to guard the ships.
But from the side of Ajax Telamon
Stirr’d not a whit Oileus’ active son;
But as on fallow-land with one accord,
Two dark-red oxen drag the well-wrought plough,
Streaming with sweat that gathers round their horns;
They by the polish’d yoke together held,
The stiff soil cleaving, down the furrow strain;
So closely, side by side, those two advanc’d.
But comrades, many and brave, on Telamon
Attended, who, whene’er with toil and sweat
His limbs grew faint, upheld his weighty shield;
While in the fray, Oileus’ noble son
No Locrians follow’d; theirs were not the hearts
To brook th’ endurance of the standing fight;
Nor had they brass-bound helms, with horsehair plume,
Nor ample shields they bore, nor ashen spear;
But came to Troy, in bows and twisted slings
Of woollen cloth confiding; and from these
Their bolts quick-show’ring, broke the Trojan ranks.
While those, in front, in glitt’ring arms oppos’d
The men of Troy, by noble Hector led:
These, in the rear, unseen, their arrows shot.
Nor stood the Trojans; for amid their ranks
The galling arrows dire confusion spread.
Then had the Trojans from the ships and tents
Back to the breezy heights of Troy been driv’n
In flight disastrous; but Polydamas
Drew near to Hector, and address’d him thus:

“Hector, I know thee, how unapt thou art
To hearken to advice; because the Gods
Have giv’n thee to excel in warlike might,
Thou deemest thyself, in counsel too, supreme;
Yet every gift thou canst not so combine:
To one the Gods have granted warlike might,
To one the dance, to one the lyre and song;
While in another’s breast all-seeing Jove
Hath plac’d the spirit of wisdom, and a mind
Discerning, for the common good of all:
By him are states preserv’d; and he himself
Best knows the value of the precious gift.
Then hear what seems to me the wisest course.
On ev’ry side the circling ring of war
Is blazing all around thee; and, thou seest,
Our valiant Trojans, since the wall they scal’d,
Or stand aloof, or scatter’d ’mid the ships
Outnumber’d, with superior forces strive.
Then thou, retiring, hither call the chiefs;
Here take we counsel fully, if to fall
Upon their well-mann’d ships, should Heaven vouchsafe
The needful strength, or, scatheless yet, withdraw;
For much I fear they soon will pay us back
Their debt of yesterday; since in their ranks
One yet remains insatiate of the fight,
And he, methinks, not long will stand aloof.”

Thus he: the prudent counsel Hector pleas’d;
Down from his chariot with his arms he leap’d,
And to Polydamas his speech address’d:

“Polydamas, detain thou here the chiefs;
Thither will I, and meet the front of war,
And, giv’n my orders, quickly here return.”

He said; and, like a snow-clad mountain high,
Uprose; and loudly shouting, in hot haste
Flew through the Trojan and Confed’rate host.
At sound of Hector’s voice, round Panthous’ son,
Polydamas, were gather’d all the chiefs.
But ’mid the foremost combatants he sought
If haply he might find Deiphobus,
And royal Helenus, and Adamas,
And gallant Asius, son of Hyrtacus.
These found he not unscath’d by wounds or death;
For some beside the ships of Greece had paid,
By Grecian hands, the forfeit of their lives,
While others wounded lay within the wall.
But, to the leftward of the bloody fray,
The godlike Paris, fair-hair’d Helen’s Lord,
Cheering his comrades to the fight, he found,
And with reproachful words address’d him thus:

“Thou wretched Paris, fair in outward form,
Thou slave of woman, manhood’s counterfeit,
Where is Deiphobus, and where the might
Of royal Helenus? where Adamas,
The son of Asius? where too Asius, son
Of Hyrtacus? and where Othryoneus?
Now from its summit totters to the fall
Our lofty Ilium; now thy doom is sure.”

To whom the godlike Paris thus replied:
“Hector, since blameless I incur thy blame,
Ne’er have I less withdrawn me from the fight,
And me not wholly vile my mother bore;
For since thou gav’st command to attack the ships,
We here against the Greeks unflinching war
Have wag’d; our comrades, whom thou seek’st, are slain:
Only Deiphobus hath left the field,
And Helenus; both wounded by the spear,
Both through the hand; but Jove their life hath spar’d.
But thou, where’er thy courage bids, lead on:
We shall be prompt to follow; to our pow’r
Thou shalt in us no lack of valour find;
Beyond his pow’r the bravest cannot fight.”

Wrought on his brother’s mind the hero’s words:
Together both they bent their steps, where rag’d
The fiercest conflict; there Cebriones,
Phalces, Orthaeus, brave Polydamas,
Palmys, and godlike Polyphetes’ might,
And Morys, and Ascanius fought; these two
Hippotion’s sons; from rich Ascania’s plains
They, as reliefs, but yestermorn had come;
Impell’d by Jove, they sought the battle field.
Onward they dash’d, impetuous as the rush
Of the fierce whirlwind, which with lightning charg’d,
From Father Jove sweeps downward o’er the plain:
As with loud roar it mingles with the sea,
The many-dashing ocean’s billows boil,
Upheaving, foam-white-crested, wave on wave;
So, rank on rank, the Trojans, closely mass’d,
In arms all glitt’ring, with their chiefs advanc’d;
Hector, the son of Priam, led them on,
In combat terrible as blood-stain’d Mars:
Before his breast his shield’s broad orb he bore,
Of hides close join’d, with brazen plates o’erlaid;
The gleaming helmet nodded o’er his brow.
He, with proud step, protected by his shield,
On ev’ry side the hostile ranks survey’d,
If signs of yielding he might trace; but they
Unshaken stood; and with like haughty mien,
Ajax at Hector thus defiance hurl’d:

“Draw nearer, mighty chief; why seek to scare
Our valiant Greeks? we boast ourselves of war
Not wholly unskill’d, though now the hand of Jove
Lies heavy on us with the scourge of Heav’n.
Thou hop’st, forsooth, our vessels to destroy;
But stalwart arms for their defence we boast.
Long ere that day shall your proud city fall,
Tak’n and destroy’d by our victorious hands.
Not far the hour, when thou thyself in flight
To Jove and all the Gods shalt make thy pray’r,
That swifter than the falcon’s wing thy steeds
May bear thee o’er the dusty plain to Troy.”

Thus as he spoke, upon his right appear’d
An eagle, soaring high; the crowd of Greeks
The fav’ring omen saw, and shouted loud:
Then noble Hector thus: “What words are these,
Ajax, thou babbling braggart, vain of speech!
For would to Heav’n I were as well assur’d
I were the son of aegis-bearing Jove,
Born of imperial Juno, and myself
In equal honour with Apollo held
Or blue-ey’d Pallas, as I am assur’d
This day is fraught with ill to all the Greeks:
Thou ’mid the rest shalt perish, if thou dare
My spear encounter, which thy dainty skin
Shall rend; and slain beside the ships, thy flesh
Shall glut the dogs and carrion birds of Troy.”

He said, and led them on; with eager cheers
They followed; shouted loud the hindmost throng.
On th’ other side the Greeks return’d the shout:
Of all the Trojans’ bravest they, unmov’d,
The onset bore; their mingled clamours rose
To Heav’n, and reach’d the glorious light of Jove.



ARGUMENT.

JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.


Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the
increasing clamour of the war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he
meets that prince with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the
extremity of the danger. Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by
night, which Ulysses withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that,
wounded as they were, they should go forth and encourage the army with
their presence; which advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of
Jupiter to the Trojans, forms a design to overreach him; she sets off
her charms with the utmost care, and (the more surely to enchant him)
obtains the magic girdle of Venus. She then applies herself to the god
of Sleep, and with some difficulty persuades him to seal the eyes of
Jupiter; this done, she goes to Mount Ida, where the god at first
sight, is ravished with her beauty, sinks in her embraces, and is laid
asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his slumber, and succours the
Greeks; Hector is struck to the ground with a prodigious stone by Ajax,
and carried off from the battle; several actions succeed; till the
Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way; the lesser Ajax
signalizes himself in a particular manner.

BOOK XIV.

Nor did the battle-din not reach the ears
Of Nestor, o’er the wine-cup; and his speech
He thus address’d to Æsculapius’ son:

“Say, good Machaon, what these sounds may mean;
For louder swells the tumult round the ships.
But sit thou here, and drink the ruddy wine,
Till fair-hair’d Hecamede shall prepare
The gentle bath, and wash thy gory wounds;
While I go forth, and all around survey.”

He said, and from the wall a buckler took,
Well-wrought, with brass resplendent, which his son,
Brave Thrasymedes, in the tent had left,
While with his father’s shield himself was girt;
A sturdy spear too, tipp’d with brass, he took:
Without the tent he stood; and there his eyes
A woful sight beheld; the Greeks in flight,
The haughty Trojans pressing on their rout
Confus’d; the Greeks’ protecting wall o’erthrown.
As heaves the darkling sea with silent swell,
Expectant of the boist’rous gale’s approach;
Nor onward either way is pour’d its flood,
Until it feel th’ impelling blast from Heav’n;
So stood th’ old man, his mind perplex’d with doubt,
To mingle in the throng, or counsel seek
Of mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son.
Thus as he mused, the better course appear’d,
To seek Atrides; fiercely fought the rest
With mutual slaughter; loud their armour rang
With thrusts of swords and double-pointed spears.
There Nestor met, advancing from the ships,
The Heav’n-born Kings, Ulysses, Diomed,
And Agamemnon, son of Atreus, all
By wounds disabled; for the ships were beach’d
Upon the shore, beside the hoary sea,
Far from the battle; higher, tow’rd the plain
The foremost had been drawn, and with a wall
Their sterns surrounded; for the spacious beach
Could not contain them, and in narrow bounds
Were pent their multitudes; so high on land
They drew, and rang’d them side by side, and fill’d,
Within the headlands, all the wide-mouth’d bay.
Thus they, their steps supporting on their spears,
Together came, spectators of the fight;
Deep sorrow fill’d their breasts; them Nestor met,
The fear increasing, which their souls possess’d.
To whom the monarch Agamemnon thus:

“O Nestor, son of Neleus, pride of Greece,
Why com’st thou here, and leav’st the battle-field?
Greatly I fear that noble Hector now
His menace will fulfil, who made his boast
Before th’ assembled Trojans, that to Troy
He never would return, until our ships
The flames had master’d, and ourselves the sword.
Such was his threat, and now he makes it good.
Heav’n! can it be that I of other Greeks,
As of Achilles, have incurr’d the wrath,
Who thence refuse to battle for the ships?”

To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
“Such are indeed our prospects; Jove on high
Could to our fortunes give no diff’rent turn.
The wall is raz’d, wherein our trust we plac’d
To guard, impregnable, ourselves and ships;
And now around the ships their war they wage,
Unceasing, unabated; none might tell
By closest scrutiny, which way are driv’n
The routed Greeks, so intermix’d they fall
Promiscuous; and the cry ascends to Heav’n.
But come, discuss we what may best be done,
If judgment aught may profit us; ourselves
To mingle in the fray I counsel not;
It were not well for wounded men to fight.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Nestor, since to the ships the war is brought,
Nor hath the wall avail’d to stay their course,
Nor yet the deep-dug trench, on which we Greeks
Much toil bestow’d, and which we vainly hop’d
Might guard, impregnable, ourselves and ships;
Seems it the will of Saturn’s mighty son
That, far from Argos, from our native land,
We all should here in nameless graves be laid.
I knew when once he lov’d to aid the Greeks;
But now I see that to the blessed Gods
Our foes he equals, and our strength confounds.
Hear then my counsel; let us all agree
The ships that nearest to the sea are beach’d
To launch upon the main, till nightfall there
To ride at anchor: if that e’en by night
The Trojans may suspend their fierce assault;
Then may we launch in safety all the fleet.
No shame it is to fly, although by night,
Impending evil; better so to fly
Than by the threaten’d danger be o’erta’en.”

To whom, with scornful glance, Ulysses sage:
“What words have pass’d the barrier of thy lips,
Thou son of Atreus? counsellor of ill!
Would thou hadst been of some ignoble band
The leader, not the chief of such a host
As ours, on whom, from youth to latest age,
Jove hath the gift bestow’d, to bear the brunt
Of hardy war, till ev’ry man be slain.
And think’st thou so to leave the lofty walls
Of Troy, the object of our painful toil?
Be silent, that no other Greek may hear
Words, which no man might trust his tongue to speak,
Who nobler counsels understands, and wields
A royal sceptre, and th’ allegiance claims
Of numbers, such as those that own thy sway.
Thy counsels all I utterly condemn;
Who, ’mid the close and clamour of the fight,
Wouldst have us launch our ships, and give the foe,
Already too triumphant, cause renew’d
For boasting; then were death our certain lot;
For, if the ships he launch’d, not long will Greeks
Sustain the war, but with reverted eyes
Shrink from the fight; to such pernicious end
Would lead thy baneful counsels, mighty chief.”

Whom answer’d Agamemnon, King of men:
“Ulysses, thy rebuke hath wrung my soul;
Yet never meant I, that against their will
The sons of Greece should launch their well found ships:
But if there be who better counsel knows,
Or young or old, his words would please me well.”

Then rose the valiant Diomed, and said:
“The man is near at hand, nor far to seek,
If ye will hear, nor take offence, that I,
The youngest of you all, presume to speak.
Yet of a noble sire I boast me sprung,
Tydeus, who sleeps beneath the Theban soil:
To Portheus three brave sons were born, who dwelt
In Pleuron and in lofty Calydon,
Agrius, and Melas; bravest of them all,
My father’s father, Œneus, was the third.
He there remain’d; my father, wand’ring long,
To Argos came; such was the will of Jove
And of th’ Immortals all; he there espous’d
Adrastus’ daughter; own’d a wealthy house,
With fertile corn-lands round, and orchards stor’d
With goodly fruit-trees; num’rous flocks he had,
And all the Greeks in feats of arms excell’d.
Hear ye the words I speak, for they are true:
And if my speech be wise, despise it not,
As of one worthless, or ignobly born.
Though wounded, to the battle I advise
That we perforce repair; yet not ourselves
To join the combat, or confront the spears,
Lest wounds to wounds be added; but to rouse
The spirits of some, who, zealous heretofore,
How stand aloof, nor mingle in the fray.”

He said, and they, his words approving, went,
By Agamemnon led, the King of men.
Nor careless was the watch by Neptune kept:
With them, in likeness of an aged man,
He went, and Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
By the right hand he took, and thus address’d:

“O son of Atreus, great is now the joy
With which Achilles’ savage breast is fill’d,
Who sees the slaughter and the rout of Greeks:
For nought he has of heart, no, not a whit:
But perish he, accursed of the Gods!
Nor deem thou that to thee the blessed Gods
Are wholly hostile; yet again the chiefs
And councillors of Troy shall scour in flight
The dusty plain; and from the ships and tents
Thine eyes shall see them to the city fly.”

He said; and loudly shouting, onward rush’d.
As of nine thousand or ten thousand men,
In deadly combat meeting, is the shout;
Such was the sound which from his ample chest
Th’ Earth-shaker sent; and ev’ry Greek inspir’d
With stern resolve to wage unflinching war.

Standing on high Olympus’ topmost peak,
The golden-throned Juno downward look’d,
And, busied in the glory-giving strife,
Her husband’s brother and her own she saw,
Saw, and rejoic’d; next, seated on the crest
Of spring-abounding Ida, Jove she saw,
Sight hateful in her eyes! then ponder’d deep
The stag-ey’d Queen, how best she might beguile
The wakeful mind of aegis-bearing Jove;
And, musing, this appear’d the readiest mode:
Herself with art adorning, to repair
To Ida; there, with fondest blandishment
And female charm, her husband to enfold
In love’s embrace; and gentle, careless sleep
Around his eyelids and his senses pour.
Her chamber straight she sought, by Vulcan built,
Her son; by whom were to the door-posts hung
Close-fitting doors, with secret keys secur’d,
That, save herself, no God might enter in.
There enter’d she, and clos’d the shining doors;
And with ambrosia first her lovely skin
She purified, with fragrant oil anointing,
Ambrosial, breathing forth such odours sweet,
That, wav’d above the brazen floor of Jove,
All earth and Heav’n were with the fragrance fill’d;
O’er her fair skin this precious oil she spread;
Comb’d out her flowing locks, and with her hand
Wreath’d the thick masses of the glossy hair,
Immortal, bright, that crown’d th’ imperial head.
A robe ambrosial then, by Pallas wrought,
She donn’d, in many a curious pattern trac’d,
With golden brooch beneath her breast confin’d.
Her zone, from which a hundred tassels hung,
She girt about her; and, in three bright drops,
Her glitt’ring gems suspended from her ears;
And all around her grace and beauty shone.
Then o’er her head th’ imperial Goddess threw
A beauteous veil, new-wrought, as sunlight white;
And on her well-turn’d feet her sandals bound.
Her dress completed, from her chamber forth
She issued, and from th’ other Gods apart
She call’d to Venus, and address’d her thus:
“Say, wilt thou grant, dear child, the boon I ask?
Or wilt thou say me nay, in wrath that I
Espouse the Greek, as thou the Trojan cause?”

To whom the laughter-loving Venus thus:
“Daughter of Saturn, Juno, mighty Queen,
Tell me thy wish; to grant it if my pow’r
May aught avail, thy pleasure shall be done.”

To whom great Juno thus, with artful speech:
“Give me the loveliness, and pow’r to charm,
Whereby thou reign’st o’er Gods and men supreme.
For to the bounteous Earth’s extremest bounds
I go, to visit old Oceanus,
The sire of Gods, and Tethys, who of yore
From Rhaea took me, when all-seeing Jove
Hurl’d Saturn down below the earth and seas,
And nurs’d me in their home with tend’rest care;
I go to visit them, and reconcile
A lengthen’d feud; for since some cause of wrath
Has come between them, they from rites of love
And from the marriage-bed have long abstain’d:
Could I unite them by persuasive words,
And to their former intercourse restore,
Their love and rev’rence were for ever mine.”

Whom answer’d thus the laughter-loving Queen:
“I ought not, and I cannot, say thee nay,
Who liest encircled by the arms of Jove.”

Thus Venus spoke; and from her bosom loos’d
Her broider’d cestus, wrought with ev’ry charm
To win the heart; there Love, there young Desire,
There fond Discourse, and there Persuasion dwelt,
Which oft enthralls the mind of wisest men.
This in her hand she plac’d, as thus she spoke:
“Take thou from me, and in thy bosom hide,
This broider’d cestus; and, whate’er thy wish,
Thou shalt not here ungratified return.”

Thus Venus; smil’d the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n,
And, smiling, in her bosom hid the gift.
Then Venus to her father’s house return’d;
But Juno down from high Olympus sped;
O’er sweet Emathia, and Pieria’s range,
O’er snowy mountains of horse-breeding Thrace,
Their topmost heights, she soar’d, nor touch’d the earth.
From Athos then she cross’d the swelling sea,
Until to Lemnos, godlike Thoas’ seat,
She came; there met she Sleep, twin-born with Death,
Whom, as his hand she clasp’d, she thus address’d:

“Sleep, universal King of Gods and men,
If ever thou hast listen’d to my voice,
Grant me the boon which now I ask, and win
My ceaseless favour in all time to come.
When Jove thou seest in my embraces lock’d,
Do thou his piercing eyes in slumber seal.
Rich guerdon shall be thine; a gorgeous throne,
Immortal, golden; which my skilful son,
Vulcan, shall deftly frame; beneath, a stool
Whereon at feasts thy feet may softly rest.”

Whom answer’d thus the gentle God of Sleep:
“Daughter of Saturn, Juno, mighty Queen,
On any other of th’ immortal Gods
I can with ease exert my slumb’rous pow’r;
Even to the stream of old Oceanus,
Prime origin of all; but Saturn’s son,
Imperial Jove, I dare not so approach,
Nor sink in sleep, save by his own desire.
Already once, obeying thy command,
A fearful warning I receiv’d, that day
When from the capture and the sack of Troy
That mighty warrior, son of Jove, set sail;
For, circumfus’d around, with sweet constraint
I bound the sense of aegis-bearing Jove,
While thou, with ill-design, rousing the force
Of winds tempestuous o’er the stormy sea,
Didst cast him forth on Coos’ thriving isle,
Far from his friends; then Jove, awaking, pour’d
His wrath, promiscuous, on th’ assembled Gods;
Me chief his anger sought; and from on high
Had hurl’d me, plung’d beneath th’ unfathom’d sea,
But Night, the vanquisher of Gods and men,
Her fugitive received me; he his wrath
Repress’d, unwilling to invade the claims
Of holy Night; and now thou fain wouldst urge
That I another reckless deed essay.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Why, Sleep, with thoughts like these perplex thy mind
Think’st thou that Jove as ardently desires
To aid the men of Troy, as fiercely burn’d
His anger on his valiant son’s behalf?
Grant my request; and of the Graces one,
The youngest and the fairest, have to wife,
Pasithea, whom thy love hath long pursued.”

Thus promis’d Juno; Sleep, rejoicing, heard,
And answer’d thus: “Swear then the awful oath.
Inviolable, by the stream of Styx,
Thy one hand laid upon the fruitful earth,
The other resting on the sparkling sea;
That all the Gods who in the nether realms
With Saturn dwell, may of our solemn bond
Be witnesses, that of the Graces one,
The youngest, fairest, I shall have to wife,
Pasithea, whom my love hath long pursued.”

He said: nor did the white-arm’d Queen refuse;
She took the oath requir’d; and call’d by name
On all the Titans, sub-Tartarean Gods:
Then, sworn and ratified the oath, they pass’d
From Lemnos, and from Imbros, veil’d in cloud,
Skimming their airy way; on Lectum first,
In spring-abounding Ida, nurse of beasts,
The sea they left, and journey’d o’er the land,
While wav’d beneath their feet the lofty woods.
There Sleep, ere yet he met the eye of Jove,
Remain’d; and, mounted on a lofty pine,
The tallest growth of Ida, that on high
Flung through the desert air its boughs to Heav’n,
Amid the pine’s close branches lay ensconc’d;
Like to a mountain bird of shrillest note,
Whom Gods the Chalcis, men the night-hawk call.
Juno meanwhile to Ida’s summit sped,
To Gargarus; the Cloud-compeller saw;
He saw, and sudden passion fir’d his soul,
As when, their parents’ eyes eluding, first
They tasted of the secret joys of love.
He rose to meet her, and address’d her thus:

“From high Olympus, Juno, whither bound,
And how, to Ida hast thou come in haste?
For horses here or chariot hast thou none.”

To whom thus Juno with deceitful speech
Replied: “To fertile earth’s extremest bounds
I go, to visit old Oceanus,
The sire of Gods, and Tethys, who of yore
Receiv’d, and nurtur’d me with tend’rest care.
I go to visit them, and reconcile
A lengthen’d feud; for since some cause of wrath
Has come between them, they from rites of love
And from the marriage-bed have long abstain’d.
Meanwhile at spring-abounding Ida’s foot
My horses wait me, that o’er land and sea
Alike my chariot bear; on thine account
From high Olympus hither have I come,
Lest it displease thee, if, to thee unknown,
I sought the Ocean’s deeply-flowing stream.”
To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Juno, thy visit yet awhile defer;
And let us now in love’s delights indulge:
For never yet did such a flood of love
For Goddess or for mortal fill my soul;
Not for Ixion’s beauteous wife, who bore
Pirithous, sage in council as the Gods;
Nor the neat-footed maiden Danae,
Acrisius’ daughter, her who Perseus bore,
Th’ observ’d of all; nor noble Phoenix’ child,
Who bore me Minos, and the godlike might
Of Rhadamanthus; nor for Semele,
Nor for Alcmena fair, of whom was born
In Thebes the mighty warrior Hercules,
As Bacchus, joy of men, of Semele:
No, nor for Ceres, golden-tressed Queen,
Nor for Latona bright, nor for thyself,
As now with fond desire for thee I burn.”

To whom thus Juno with deceitful speech:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
If here on Ida, in the face of day,
We celebrate the mystic rites of love.
How if some other of th’ immortal Gods
Should find us sleeping, and ’mid all the Gods
Should spread the tale abroad? I could not then
Straight to thy house, for very shame, return.
But if indeed such passion fill thy soul,
Thou hast thy secret chamber, built for thee
By Vulcan, with close-fitting doors secur’d;
Thither, if such thy pleasure, go we now.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Juno, nor fear the eye of God or man;
For all around us I will throw such veil
Of golden cloud, that not the sun himself
With sharpest beam of light may pierce it through.”

Thus saying, in his arms he clasp’d his wife;
The teeming earth beneath them caus’d to spring
The tender grass, and lotus dew-besprent,
Crocus and hyacinth, a fragrant couch,
Profuse and soft, upspringing from the earth.
There lay they, all around them spread a veil
Of golden cloud, whence heav’nly dews distill’d.
There on the topmost height of Gargarus,
By sleep and love subdued, th’ immortal Sire,
Clasp’d in his arms his wife, repos’d in peace.

Then Sleep arose, and to the Grecian ships
In haste repairing, to th’ Earth-shaking King
His tidings bore; and standing at his side
Thus to the God his winged words address’d:

“Now, Neptune, to the Greeks thy ready aid
Afford, that short-liv’d triumph they may gain,
While slumber holds the eyes of Jove; for I
In sweet unconsciousness have drown’d his sense,
Beguil’d by Juno, in whose arms he lies.”

He said, and vanish’d ’mid the tribes of men:
But fir’d with keener zeal to aid the Greeks,
Neptune sprang forth in front, and call’d aloud:

“Again, ye Greeks, shall our remissness yield
The victory to Hector, Priam’s son,
To seize our ships, and endless glory gain?
Such is his boast and menace, since in wrath
Achilles still beside his ships remains.
Yet him we scarce should miss, if we, the rest,
But firmly stood for mutual defence.
Hear then my counsel: let us all agree,
Girt with our best and broadest shields, our heads
With flashing helmets guarded, in our hands
Grasping our longest spears, to dare the fight.
Myself will lead you on; and Priam’s son,
Though bold he be, will fear with me to cope.
And if, among our bravest, any bear
Too small a buckler, with some meaner man
Let him exchange, and don the larger shield.”

He said, and they assenting heard his speech.
The Kings themselves, Ulysses, Diomed,
And mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Though sorely wounded, yet the troops array’d;
Thro’out the ranks they pass’d, and chang’d the arms;
The bravest donn’d the best, the worse the worst.
When with their dazzling armour all were girt,
Forward they mov’d; th’ Earth-shaker led them on:
In his broad hand an awful sword he bore,
Long-bladed, vivid as the lightning’s flash:
Yet in the deadly strife he might not join,
But kindled terror in the minds of men.

Hector meantime the Trojan troops array’d.
Then fiercer grew, and more intense the strain
Of furious fight, when Ocean’s dark-hair’d King
And Priam’s noble son were met in arms,
And aided, this the Trojans, that the Greeks.
High tow’rd the tents uprose the surging sea,
As with loud clamour met th’ opposing hosts.
Less loud the roar of Ocean’s wave, that driv’n
By stormy Boreas, breaks upon the beach;
Less loud the crackling of the flames that rage
In the deep forest of some mountain glen;
Less loud the wind, to wildest fury rous’d,
Howls in the branches of the lofty oaks;
Than rose the cry of Trojans and of Greeks,
As each, with furious shout, encounter’d each.
At Ajax first, who straight before him stood,
Great Hector threw his spear, nor miss’d his aim,
Where the two belts, the one which bore his shield,
His silver-studded sword the other, met
Across his breast; these two his life preserv’d.
Hector was wroth, that from his stalwart hand
The spear had flown in vain; and back he sprang
For safety to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks:
But mighty Ajax Telamon upheav’d
A pond’rous stone, of many, all around
That scatter’d lay beneath the warriors’ feet,
And serv’d to prop the ships; with one of these,
As Hector backward stepp’d, above the shield
He smote him on the breast, below the throat.
With whirling motion, circling as it flew,
The mass he hurl’d. As by the bolt of Heav’n
Uprooted, prostrate lies some forest oak;
The sulph’rous vapour taints the air; appall’d,
Bereft of strength, the near beholder stands,
And awestruck hears the thunder-peal of Jove;
So in the dust the might of Hector lay:
Dropp’d from his hand the spear; the shield and helm
Fell with him; loud his polished armour rang.
On rush’d, with joyous shout, the sons of Greece,
In hope to seize the spoil; thick flew the spears:
Yet none might reach or wound the fallen chief;
For gather’d close around, the bravest all,
Valiant Æneas, and Polydamas,
Godlike Agenor, and the Lycian chief
Sarpedon, and the noble Glaucus stood.
Nor did the rest not aid; their shields’ broad orbs
Before him still they held, while in their arms
His comrades bore him from the battle-field,
To where, with charioteer and well-wrought car,
Beyond the fight, his flying coursers stood,
Which bore him, deeply groaning, tow’rd the town.
But when the ford was reach’d of Xanthus’ stream,
Broad-flowing, eddying, by immortal Jove
Begotten, on the ground they laid him down,
And dash’d the cooling water on his brow:
Reviv’d, he lifted up awhile his eyes;
Then on his knees half rising, he disgorg’d
The clotted blood; but backward to the earth,
Still by the blow subdu’d, again he fell,
And darkling shades of night his eyes o’erspread.

Onward, with zeal redoubled, press’d the Greeks,
When Hector from the field they saw withdrawn.
Foremost of all, Oileus’ active son,
With sudden spring assailing, Satnius slew:
Him a fair Naiad nymph to Œnops bore,
Who by the banks of Satnois kept his herds.
Him then, approaching near, Oileus’ son
Thrust through the flank: he fell, and o’er his corpse
Trojans and Greeks in stubborn fight engag’d.
But Panthous’ son a swift avenger came,
Polydamas, with brandish’d spear, and struck
Through the right shoulder Prothoenor, son
Of Areilycus; right through was driv’n
The sturdy spear; he, rolling in the dust,
Clutch’d with his palms the ground; then, shouting loud,
Thus with triumphant boast Polydamas:

“From the strong hand of Panthous’ noble son
Methinks that not in vain the spear has flown:
A Greek now bears it off; and he, perchance,
May use it as a staff to Pluto’s realm.”

Thus he; the Greeks with pain his vaunting heard;
But chief it rous’d the spirit within the breast
Of Ajax Telamon, whom close beside
The dead had fall’n; he at Polydamas,
Retreating, hurl’d in haste his glitt’ring spear;
He, springing sideways, ’scap’d the stroke of fate;
But young Archilochus, Antenor’s son,
Receiv’d the spear, for Heav’n had will’d his death:
The spine it struck, the topmost joint, where met
The head and neck, and both the tendons broke;
Forward he fell; and ere or knee or leg,
His head, and mouth, and nostrils struck the ground.

Then Ajax, in his turn, exulting, thus:
“Say now, Polydamas, and tell me true,
May this be deem’d for Prothoenor’s death
A full equivalent? no common man
He seems, and born of no ignoble race;
Valiant Antenor’s brother, or perchance
His son; the likeness speaks him near akin.”

Thus he, though well he knew; then bitter grief
Possess’d the Trojans’ souls; but Acamas,
Guarding his brother’s body, with his spear
Slew the Bœotian Promachus, who fain
Would by the feet have drawn away the dead:
Then Acamas, exulting, cried aloud:

“Ye wretched Greeks, in boasting measureless!
Not ours alone the labour and the loss
Of battle; ye too have your share of death.
Behold where lies your Promachus, subdued
Beneath my spear; not long unpaid the debt
Due for my brother’s blood! ’Tis well for him
Who leaves a brother to avenge his fate.”

Thus he; the Greeks with pain his vaunting heard;
But chief it rous’d the spirit within the breast
Of Peneleus; on Acamas he sprang,
Who waited not th’ encounter; next he slew
Ilioneus, the son of Phorbas, Lord
Of num’rous flocks, of all the Trojans most
Belov’d of Hermes, who his wealth increas’d.
To him Ilioneus, an only son,
His mother bore; who now, beneath the brow
And through the socket of the eye was struck,
Thrusting the eyeball out; for through the eye,
And backward through the head, the spear was driv’n:
With hands extended, down to earth he sank;
But Peneleus his weighty sword let fall
Full on his neck; the sever’d head and helm
Together fell, remaining still infix’d
The sturdy spear; then he, the gory head
Uplifting, to the Trojans vaunting cried:

“Go now, ye Trojans! bid that in the house
Of brave Ilioneus his parents raise
The voice of wailing for their gallant son;
As neither shall the wife of Promachus,
The son of Alegenor, with glad smile
Her husband’s coming hail, when home from Troy
We sons of Greece, with vict’ry crown’d, return.”

Thus as he spoke, pale fear possess’d them all,
Each looking round to seek escape from death.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
Who, when th’ Earth-shaker turn’d the tide of war,
First bore away his foeman’s bloody spoils?

Great Ajax Telamon first Hyrtius smote,
The son of Gyrtius, who to battle led
The warlike Mysians; next Antilochus
From Mermerus and Phalces stripp’d their arms;
Meriones Hippotion gave to death,
And Morys; Teucer Periphetes slew,
And Prothoon; Menelaus, through the flank
Smote Hyperenor; as the grinding spear
Drain’d all his vitals, through the gaping wound
His spirit escap’d, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
But chiefest slaughter of the Trojans wrought
Oileus’ active son; of all the Greeks
No foot so swift as his, when Jove had fill’d
Their souls with fear, to chase the flying foe.



ARGUMENT.

THE FIFTH BATTLE, AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.


Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector
in a swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks; he is highly
incensed at the artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions;
she is then sent to Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of
the gods, attempts with extraordinary address to incense them against
Jupiter; in particular she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he
is ready to take arms, but is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo
obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris commands Neptune to leave the battle,
to which, after much reluctance and passion, he consents. Apollo
reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him back to the battle, marches
before him with his aegis, and turns the fortune of the fight. He
breaks down the first part of the Grecian wall; the Trojans rush in,
and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are yet repelled
by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.

BOOK XV.

Now when the Trojans had recross’d the trench
And palisades, and in their headlong flight
Many had fall’n by Grecian swords, the rest,
Routed, and pale with fear, made head awhile
Beside their cars; then Jove on Ida’s height
At golden-throned Juno’s side awoke;
Rising, he saw the Trojans and the Greeks,
Those in confusion, while behind them press’d
The Greeks, triumphant, Neptune in their midst:
He saw too Hector stretch’d upon the plain,
His comrades standing round; senseless he lay,
Drawing short breath, blood gushing from his mouth;
For by no feeble hand the blow was dealt.

Pitying, the Sire of Gods and men beheld,
And thus, with sternest glance, to Juno spoke:
“This, Juno, is thy work! thy wicked wiles
Have Hector quell’d, and Trojans driv’n to flight:
Nor know I but thyself mayst reap the fruit,
By shameful scourging, of thy vile deceit.
Hast thou forgotten how in former times
I hung thee from on high, and to thy feet
Attach’d two pond’rous anvils, and thy hands
With golden fetters bound, which none might break?
There didst thou hang amid the clouds of Heav’n;
Through all Olympus’ breadth the Gods were wroth;
Yet dar’d not one approach to set thee free.
If any so had ventur’d, him had I
Hurl’d from Heav’n’s threshold till to earth he fell,
With little left of life. Yet was not quench’d
My wrath on godlike Hercules’ account,
Whom thou, with Boreas, o’er the wat’ry waste
With fell intent didst send; and tempest-toss’d,
Cast him ashore on Coos’ fruitful isle.
I rescued him from thence, and brought him back,
After long toil, to Argos’ grassy plains.
This to thy mind I bring, that thou mayst learn
To cease thy treach’rous wiles, nor hope to gain
By all thy lavish’d blandishments of love,
Wherewith thou hast deceived me, and betray’d.”

He said; and terror seiz’d the stag-ey’d Queen;
Who thus with winged words address’d her Lord:

“By Earth I swear, and yon broad Heav’n above,
And Stygian stream beneath, the weightiest oath
Of solemn pow’r to bind the blessed Gods;
By thine own sacred head, our nuptial bed,
Whose holy tie I never could forswear;
That not by my suggestion and advice
Earth-shaking Neptune on the Trojan host,
And Hector, pours his wrath, and aids the Greeks;
In this he but obeys his own desire,
Who looks with pity on the Grecian host
Beside their ships o’erborne; and could my words
Prevail, my counsel were to shape his course,
O cloud-girt King, obedient to thy will.”

She said; the Sire of Gods and men, well pleas’d,
Her answer heard, and thus with gracious smile:

“If, stag-ey’d Queen, in synod of the Gods
Thy counsels shall indeed with mine agree,
Neptune, how strong soe’er his wish, must change
His course, obedient to thy will and mine;
And if in all sincerity thou speak,
Go to th’ assembled Gods, and hither send
Iris, and Phoebus of the silver bow;
That she may to the Grecian camp repair,
And bid that Neptune from the battle-field
Withdraw, and to his own domain retire;
While Phoebus Hector to the fight restores,
Inspiring new-born vigour, and allaying
The mortal pains which bow his spirit down:
Then, heartless fear infusing in the Greeks,
Put them to flight, that flying they may fall
Beside Achilles’ ships; his comrade then,
Patroclus, he shall send to battle forth
To be by Hector slain, in front of Troy;
Yet not to fall till many valiant youths
Have felt his prowess; and, amid the rest,
My son, Sarpedon; by his comrade’s death
Enrag’d, Achilles Hector shall subdue;
Thenceforth my counsel is, that from the ships
The Trojan force shall still be backward driv’n,
Until at length, by Pallas’ deep designs,
The Greeks possess the lofty walls of Troy.
Yet will not I my anger intermit,
Nor suffer other of th’ immortal Gods
To aid the Greeks, till Peleus’ son behold
His wish accomplish’d, and the boon obtain’d
I promis’d once, and with a nod confirm’d,
That day when sea-born Thetis clasp’d my knees,
And pray’d me to avenge her warrior son.”

Thus he; the white-arm’d Queen of Heav’n submiss
His mandate heard; and from th’ Idaean mount
With rapid flight to high Olympus sped.
Swift as the mind of man, who many a land
Hath travell’d o’er, and with reflective thought
Recalls, “here was I such a day, or here,”
And in a moment many a scene surveys;
So Juno sped o’er intervening space;
Olympus’ heights she reach’d, and in the house
Of Jove appear’d amid th’ assembled Gods.
They at her coming rose, with golden cups
Greeting their Queen’s approach; the rest she pass’d,
And from the hand of fair-fac’d Themis took
The proffer’d cup, who first had run to meet,
And thus with winged words address’d the Queen:
“Juno, why com’st thou hither? and with looks
Of one distraught with, fear? hath Saturn’s son,
Thy mighty Lord, thus sore affrighted thee?”
To whom the white-arm’d Goddess, Juno, thus:

“Forbear thy questions, Themis; well thou know’st
How haughty and imperious is his mind;
Thou for the Gods in haste prepare the feast;
Then shalt thou learn, amid th’ Immortals all,
What evil he designs; nor all, I ween,
His counsels will approve, or men, or Gods,
Though now in blissful ignorance they feast.”

She said, and sat; the Gods, oppress’d with care,
Her farther speech awaited; on her lips
There dwelt indeed a smile, but not a ray
Pass’d o’er her dark’ning brow, as thus her wrath
Amid th’ assembled Gods found vent in words:

“Fools are we all, who madly strive with Jove,
Or hope, by access to his throne, to sway,
By word or deed, his course; from all apart,
He all our counsels heeds not, but derides;
And boasts o’er all th’ immortal Gods to reign
In unapproach’d pre-eminence of pow’r.
Prepare then each his sev’ral woe to bear;
On Mars e’en now, methinks, the blow hath fall’n;
Since in the fight, the man he loves the best,
And boasts his son, Ascalaphus, is slain.”
She said; and Mars, enrag’d, his brawny thigh
Smote with his hands, and thus, lamenting, spoke:

“Blame not, ye Gods, who on Olympus dwell,
That to the Grecian ships I haste, to avenge
My slaughter’d son, though blasted by Heav’n’s fire
’Twere mine ’mid corpses, blood, and dust to lie.”

He said, and gave command to Fear and Flight
To yoke his car; and donn’d his glitt’ring arms.
Then from the throne of Jove had heavier wrath
And deeper vengeance on th’ Immortals fall’n,
But Pallas, in alarm for all the Gods,
Quitting in haste the throne whereon she sat,
Sprang past the vestibule, and from his head
The helmet lifted, from his arm the shield;
Took from his sturdy hand, and rear’d upright,
The brazen spear; then with reproachful words
She thus assail’d th’ impetuous God of War;

“Frantic, and passion-maddened, thou art lost!
Hast thou no ears to hear! or are thy mind
And sense of rev’rence utterly destroyed?
Or heard’st thou not what white-arm’d Juno spoke,
Fresh from the presence of Olympian Jove?
Wouldst thou, thine evil destiny fulfill’d,
By hard constraint, despite thy grief, be driv’n
Back to Olympus; and to all the rest
Confusion and disaster with thee bring?
At once from valiant Trojans and from Greeks
His thoughts would be diverted, and his wrath
Embroil Olympus, and on all alike,
Guilty or not, his anger would be pour’d.
Waive then thy vengeance for thy gallant son;
Others as brave of heart, as strong of arm,
Have fall’n, and yet must fall; and vain th’ attempt
To watch at once o’er all the race of men.”

Thus saying, to his seat again she forc’d
Th’ impetuous Mars: meanwhile, without the house,
Juno, by Jove’s command, Apollo call’d,
And Iris, messenger from God to God;
And thus to both her winged words address’d:

“Jove bids you with all speed to Ida haste;
And when, arriv’d, before his face ye stand,
Whate’er he orders, that observe and do.”

Thus Juno spoke, and to her throne return’d;
While they to spring-abounding Ida’s heights,
Wild nurse of forest beasts, pursued their way;
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there they found
Upon the topmost crag of Gargarus,
An incense-breathing cloud around him spread.
Before the face of cloud-compelling Jove
They stood; well-pleas’d he witness’d their approach
In swift obedience to his consort’s words,
And thus to Iris first his speech address’d:

“Haste thee, swift Iris, and to Ocean’s King
My message bear, nor misreporting aught,
Nor aught omitting; from the battle-field
Bid him retire, and join th’ assembled Gods,
Or to his own domain of sea withdraw.
If my commands he heed not, nor obey,
Let him consider in his inmost soul
If, mighty though he be, he dare await
My hostile coming; mightier far than him,
His elder born; nor may his spirit aspire
To rival me, whom all regard with awe.”

He said; swift-footed Iris, at the word,
From Ida’s heights to sacred Ilium sped.
Swift as the snow-flakes from the clouds descend,
Or wintry hail before the driving blast
Of Boreas, ether-born; so swift to Earth
Descended Iris; by his side she stood,
And with these words th’ Earth-shaking God address’d:
“A message, dark-hair’d Circler of the Earth,
To thee I bring from Ægis-bearing Jove.
He bids thee straightway from the battle-field
Retire, and either join th’ assembled Gods,
Or to thine own domain of sea withdraw.
If his commands thou heed not, nor obey,
Hither he menaces himself to come,
And fight against thee; but he warns thee first,
Beware his arm, as mightier far than thee,
Thine elder born; nor may thy spirit aspire
To rival him, whom all regard with awe.”

To whom in tow’ring wrath th’ Earth-shaking God:
“By Heav’n, though great he be, he yet presumes
Somewhat too far, if me, his equal born,
He seeks by force to baffle of my will.
We were three brethren, all of Rhaea born
To Saturn; Jove and I, and Pluto third,
Who o’er the nether regions holds his sway.
Threefold was our partition; each obtain’d
His meed of honour due; the hoary Sea
By lot my habitation was assign’d;
The realms of Darkness fell to Pluto’s share;
Broad Heav’n, amid the sky and clouds, to Jove;
But Earth, and high Olympus, are to all
A common heritage; nor will I walk
To please the will of Jove; though great he be,
With his own third contented let him rest:
Nor let him think that I, as wholly vile,
Shall quail before his arm; his lofty words
Were better to his daughters and his sons
Address’d, his own begotten; who perforce
Must listen to his mandates, and obey.”

To whom swift-footed Iris thus replied:
“Is this, then, dark-hair’d Circler of the Earth,
The message, stern and haughty, which to Jove
Thou bidd’st me bear? perchance thine angry mood
May bend to better counsels; noblest minds
Are easiest bent; and o’er superior age
Thou know’st th’ avenging Furies ever watch.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Immortal Iris, weighty are thy words,
And in good season spoken; and ’tis well
When envoys are by sound discretion led.
Yet are my heart and mind with grief oppress’d,
When me, his equal both by birth and fate,
He seeks with haughty words to overbear.
I yield, but with indignant sense of wrong.
This too I say, nor shall my threat be vain:
Let him remember, if in my despite,
’Gainst Pallas’, Juno’s, Hermes’, Vulcan’s will,
He spare to overthrow proud Ilium’s tow’rs,
And crown with victory the Grecian arms,
The feud between us never can be heal’d.”

Th’ Earth-shaker said, and from the field withdrew
Beneath the ocean wave, the warrior Greeks
His loss deploring; to Apollo then
The Cloud-compeller thus his speech address’d:

“Go straight to Hector of the brazen helm,
Good Phoebus; for beneath the ocean wave
Th’ Earth-shaker hath withdrawn, escaping thus
My high displeasure; had he dar’d resist,
The tumult of our strife had reach’d the Gods
Who in the nether realms with Saturn dwell.
Yet thus ’tis better, both for me and him,
That, though indignant, to my will he yields;
For to compel him were no easy task.
Take thou, and wave on high thy tassell’d shield,
The Grecian warriors daunting: thou thyself,
Far-darting King, thy special care bestow
On noble Hector; so restore his strength
And vigour, that in panic to their ships,
And the broad Hellespont, the Greeks be driv’n.
Then will I so by word and deed contrive
That they may gain fresh respite from their toil.”

He said, nor did Apollo not obey
His Sire’s commands; from Ida’s heights he flew,
Like to a falcon, swooping on a dove,
Swiftest of birds; then Priam’s son he found,
The godlike Hector, stretch’d at length no more,
But sitting, now to consciousness restor’d,
With recognition looking on his friends;
The cold sweat dried, nor gasping now for breath,
Since by the will of Ægis-bearing Jove
To life new waken’d; close beside him stood
The Far-destroyer, and address’d him thus:
“Hector, thou son of Priam, why apart
From all thy comrades art thou sitting here,
Feeble and faint? What trouble weighs thee down?”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
With falt’ring voice: “Who art thou, Prince of Gods,
Who thus enquirest of me? know’st thou not
How a huge stone, by mighty Ajax hurl’d,
As on his comrades by the Grecian ships
I dealt destruction, struck me on the breast,
Dash’d to the earth, and all my vigour quell’d?
I deem’d in sooth this day my soul, expir’d,
Should see the dead, and Pluto’s shadowy realm.”

To whom again the far-destroying King:
“Be of good cheer; from Saturn’s son I come
From Ida’s height to be thy guide and guard;
Phoebus Apollo, of the golden sword,
I, who of old have thy protector been,
Thee and thy city guarding. Rise then straight;
Summon thy num’rous horsemen; bid them drive
Their flying cars to assail the Grecian ships:
I go before: and will thy horses’ way
Make plain and smooth, and daunt the warrior Greeks.”

His words fresh vigour in the chief infus’d.
As some proud steed, at well-fill’d manger fed,
His halter broken, neighing, scours the plain,
And revels in the widely-flowing stream
To bathe his sides; then tossing high his head,
While o’er his shoulders streams his ample mane,
Light-borne on active limbs, in conscious pride,
To the wide pastures of the mares he flies;
So vig’rous, Hector plied his active limbs,
His horsemen summoning at Heav’n’s command.

As when a rustic crowd of men and dogs
Have chas’d an antler’d stag, or mountain goat,
That ’mid the crags and thick o’ershadowing wood
Hath refuge found, and baffled their pursuit:
If, by the tumult rous’d, a lion stand,
With bristling mane, before them, back they turn,
Check’d in their mid career; ev’n so the Greeks,
Who late in eager throngs were pressing on,
Thrusting with swords and double-pointed spears,
When Hector moving through the ranks they saw,
Recoil’d, and to their feet their courage fell.
To whom thus Thoas spoke, Andraemon’s son,
Ætolia’s bravest warrior, skill’d to throw
The jav’lin, dauntless in the stubborn fight;
By few surpass’d in speech, when in debate
In full assembly Grecian youths contend.
He thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Great is the marvel which our eyes behold,
That Hector see again to life restor’d,
Escap’d the death we hop’d him to have met
Beneath the hands of Ajax Telamon.
Some God hath been his guard, and Hector sav’d,
Whose arm hath slack’d the knees of many a Greek:
So will he now; for not without the aid
Of Jove, the Lord of thunder, doth he stand
So boldly forth, so eager for the fight.
Hear, then, and all by my advice be rul’d:
Back to the ships dismiss the gen’ral crowd;
While of our army we, the foremost men,
Stand fast, and meeting him with levell’d spears,
Hold him in check; and he, though brave, may fear
To throw himself amid our serried ranks.”

He said: they heard, and all obey’d his words:
The mighty Ajax, and Idomeneus
The King, and Teucer, and Meriones,
And Meges, bold as Mars, with all their best,
Their stedfast battle rang’d, to wait th’ assault
Of Hector and his Trojans; while behind,
Th’ unwarlike many to the ships retir’d.
The Trojan mass came on, by Hector led
With haughty stride; before him Phoebus went,
His shoulders veil’d in cloud; his arm sustain’d
The awful Ægis, dread to look on, hung
With shaggy tassels round and dazzling bright;
Which Vulcan, skilful workman, gave to Jove,
To scatter terror ’mid the souls of men.
This on his arm, the Trojan troops he led.
Firm stood the mass of Greeks; from either side
Shrill clamours rose; and fast from many a string
The arrows flew, and many a jav’lin, hurl’d
By vig’rous arms; some buried in the flesh
Of stalwart youths, and many, ere they reach’d
Their living mark, fell midway on the plain,
Fix’d in the ground, in vain athirst for blood.
While Phoebus motionless his Ægis held,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when he turn’d its flash
Full in the faces of the astonish’d Greeks,
And shouted loud, their spirits within them quail’d,
Their fiery courage borne in mind no more.
As when two beasts of prey, at dead of night.
With sudden onset scatter wide a herd
Of oxen, or a num’rous flock of sheep,
Their keepers absent; so unnerv’d by fear
The Greeks dispers’d; such panic ’mid their ranks,
That vict’ry so might crown the Trojan arms,
Apollo sent; and as the masses broke,
Each Trojan slew his man; by Hector’s hand
Fell Stichius and Arcesilas; the one,
The leader of Bœotia’s brass-clad host,
The other, brave Menestheus’ trusted friend.
Æneas Medon slew, and Iasus;
Medon, the great Oileus’ bastard son,
Brother of Ajax; he in Phylace,
Far from his native home, was driv’n to dwell;
Since one to Eriopis near akin,
His sire Oileus’ wife, his hand had slain:
And Iasus, th’ Athenian chief, was deem’d
The son of Sphelus, son of Bucolus.
Polydamas amid the foremost ranks
Mecistes slew, Polites Echius,
Agenor Olonius; while from Paris’ hand
An arrow, ’mid the crowd of fugitives
Shot from behind, beneath the shoulder struck
Deiocus, and through his chest was driv’n:
These while the Trojans of their arms despoil’d,
Through ditch and palisades promiscuous dash’d
The flying Greeks, and gain’d, hard-press’d, the wall;
While loudly Hector to the Trojans call’d
To assail the ships, and leave the bloody spoils:
“Whom I elsewhere, and from the ships aloof
Shall find, my hand shall doom him on the spot;
For him no fun’ral pyre his kin shall light,
Or male or female; but before the wall
Our city’s dogs his mangled flesh shall tear.”

He said; and on his horses’ shoulder point
Let fall the lash, and loudly through the ranks
Call’d on the Trojans; they, with answ’ring shout
And noise unspeakable, urg’d on with him
Their harness’d steeds; Apollo, in the van,
Trod down with ease th’ embankment of the ditch,
And fill’d it in; and o’er it bridg’d a way
Level and wide, far as a jav’lin’s flight
Hurl’d by an arm that proves its utmost strength.
O’er this their columns pass’d; Apollo bore
His Ægis o’er them, and cast down the wall;
Easy, as when a child upon the beach,
In wanton play, with hands and feet o’erthrows
The mound of sand, which late in play he rais’d;
So, Phoebus, thou, the Grecian toil and pains
Confounding, sentest panic through their souls.
Thus hemm’d beside the ships they made their stand,
While each exhorted each, and all, with hands
Outstretch’d, to ev’ry God address’d their pray’r:
And chief, Gerenian Nestor, prop of Greece,
With hands uplifted tow’rd the starry Heav’n:

“O Father Jove! if any e’er to Thee
On corn-clad plains of Argos burnt the fat
Of bulls and sheep, and offer’d up his pray’r
For safe return; and thine assenting nod
Confirm’d thy promise; O remember now
His pray’r; stave off the pitiless day of doom,
Nor let the Greeks to Trojan arms succumb.”

Thus Nestor pray’d; loud thunder’d from on high
The Lord of counsel, as he heard the pray’r
Of Neleus’ aged son; with double zeal,
The Trojans, as the mind of Jove they knew,
Press’d on the Greeks, with warlike ardour fir’d.
As o’er the bulwarks of a ship pour down
The mighty billows of the wide-path’d sea,
Driv’n by the blast, that tosses high the waves,
So down the wall, with shouts, the Trojans pour’d;
The cars admitted, by the ships they fought
With double-pointed spears, and hand to hand;
These on their chariots, on the lofty decks
Of their dark vessels those, with pond’rous spars
Which on the ships were stor’d for naval war,
Compact and strong, their heads encas’d in brass.

While yet beyond the ships, about the wall
The Greeks and Trojans fought, Patroclus still
Within the tent of brave Eurypylus
Remaining, with his converse sooth’d the chief,
And healing unguents to his wound applied,
Of pow’r to charm away the bitter pains;
But when the Trojans pouring o’er the wall,
And routed Greeks in panic flight he saw,
Deeply he groan’d, and smiting on his thigh
With either palm, in anguish thus he spoke:

“Eurypylus, how great soe’er thy need,
I can no longer stay; so fierce the storm
Of battle rages; but th’ attendants’ care
Will all thy wants supply; while I in haste
Achilles seek, and urge him to the war;
Who knows but Heav’n may grant me to succeed?
For great is oft a friend’s persuasive pow’r.”
He said, and quickly on his errand sped.

Meanwhile the Greeks, in firm array, endur’d
The onset of the Trojans; nor could these
The assailants, though in numbers less, repel;
Nor those again the Grecian masses break,
And force their passage through the ships and tents,
As by a rule, in cunning workman’s hand,
Who all his art by Pallas’ aid has learnt,
A vessel’s plank is smooth and even laid,
So level lay the balance of the fight.
Others round other ships maintain’d the war,
But Hector that of Ajax sought alone.
For that one ship they two unwearied toil’d;
Nor Hector Ajax from his post could move,
And burn the ship with fire; nor he repel
The foe who came protected by a God.
Then noble Ajax with his jav’lin smote
Caletor, son of Clytius, through the breast,
As tow’rd the ship a blazing torch he bore;
Thund’ring he fell, and dropp’d his hand the torch.
But Hector, when his eyes his kinsman saw
By the dark vessel, prostrate in the dust,
On Trojans and on Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, in this press of war
Slack not your efforts; haste to save the son
Of Clytius, nor let Greeks his arms possess,
Who ’mid their throng of ships has nobly fall’n.”
At Ajax, as he spoke, his gleaming spear
He threw, but miss’d his aim; yet Lycophron,
His comrade, of Cythera, Mastor’s son
(Who flying from Cythera’s lovely isle
With guilt of bloodshed, near to Ajax dwelt),
Standing beside the chief, above the ear
He struck, and pierc’d the brain: from the tall prow
Backwards he fell, his limbs relax’d in death.
Then Ajax, shudd’ring, on his brother call’d:

“Good Teucer, we have lost a faithful friend,
The son of Mastor, our Cytheran guest,
Whom as a father all rever’d; who now
Lies slain by noble Hector. Where are then
Thine arrows, swift-wing’d messengers of fate,
And where thy trusty bow, Apollo’s gift?”

Thus Ajax; Teucer heard, and ran in haste,
And stood beside him, with his bended bow,
And well-stor’d quiver: on the Trojans fast
He pour’d his shafts; and struck Pisenor’s son,
Clitus, the comrade of Polydamas,
The noble son of Panthous; he the reins
Held in his hand, and all his care bestow’d
To guide his horses; for, where’er the throng
Was thickest, there in Hector’s cause, and Troy’s,
He still was found; but o’er him hung the doom
Which none might turn aside; for from behind
The fateful arrow struck him through the neck;
Down from the car he fell; swerving aside,
The startled horses whirl’d the empty car.
Them first the King Polydamas beheld,
And stay’d their course; to Protiaon’s son,
Astynous, then he gave them, with command
To keep good watch, and still be near at hand;
Then ’mid the foremost join’d again the fray.
Again at Hector of the brazen helm
An arrow Teucer aim’d; and had the shaft
The life of Hector quench’d in mid career,
Not long the fight had rag’d around the ships:
But Jove’s all-seeing eye beheld, who watch’d
O’er Hector’s life, and Teucer’s hopes deceiv’d.
The bow’s well-twisted string he snapp’d in twain,
As Teucer drew; the brass-tipp’d arrow flew
Wide of the mark, and dropp’d his hand the bow.
Then to his brother, all aghast, he cried:
“O Heav’n, some God our best-laid schemes of war
Confounds, who from my hand hath, wrench’d the bow,
And snapp’d the newly-twisted string, which I
But late attach’d, my swift-wing’d shafts to bear.”

Whom answer’d thus great Ajax Telamon:
“O friend, leave there thine arrows and thy bow,
Marr’d by some God who grudges our renown;
But take in hand thy pond’rous spear, and cast
Thy shield about thy shoulders, and thyself
Stand forth, and urge the rest, to face the foe.
Let us not tamely yield, if yield we must,
Our well-built ships, but nobly dare the fight.”

“Thus Ajax spoke; and Teucer in the tent
Bestowed his bow, and o’er his shoulders threw
His fourfold shield; and on his firm-set head
A helm he plac’d, well-wrought, with horsehair plume,
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d the firm spear, with sharpen’d point of brass:
Then ran, and swiftly stood by Ajax’ side.
Hector meanwhile, who saw the weapon marr’d,
To Trojans and to Lycians call’d aloud:

“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Against the ships your wonted valour show.
E’en now, before our eyes, hath Jove destroy’d
A chieftain’s weapon. Easy ’tis to trace
O’er human wars th’ o’erruling hand of Jove,
To whom he gives the prize of victory,
And whom, withholding aid, he minishes,
As now the Greeks, while we his favour gain.
Pour then your force united on the ships;
And if there be among you, who this day
Shall meet his doom, by sword or arrow slain,
E’en let him die! a glorious death is his
Who for his country falls; and dying, leaves
Preserv’d from danger, children, wife, and home,
His heritage uninjur’d, when the Greeks
Embarking hence shall take their homeward way.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Ajax, on th’ other side, address’d the Greeks:

“Shame on ye, Greeks! this very hour decides
If we must perish, or be sav’d, and ward
Destruction from our ships; and can ye hope
That each, if Hector of the glancing helm
Shall burn our ships, on foot can reach his home?
Or hear ye not, how, burning to destroy
Our vessels, Hector cheers his forces on?
Not to the dance, but to the fight he calls;
Nor better counsel can for us be found,
Than in close fight with heart and hand to join.
’Twere better far at once to die, than live
Hemm’d in and straiten’d thus, in dire distress,
Close to our ships, by meaner men beset.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Then Hector Schedius, Perimedes’ son,
The Thracian leader, slew; on th’ other side
Ajax the captain of the foot o’ercame,
Laodamas, Antenor’s noble son;
While of his arms Polydamas despoil’d
Cyllenian Otus, friend of Phyleus’ son,
The proud Epeians’ leader; Meges saw,
And rush’d upon him; but Polydamas,
Stooping, the blow evaded; him he miss’d;
For Phoebus will’d not Panthous’ son should fall
In the front rank contending; but the spear
Smote Croesmus through the breast; thund’ring he fell,
And from his corpse the victor stripp’d his arms.
Him Dolops, son of Lampus, spearman skill’d,
Well train’d in ev’ry point of war, assail’d
(The son of Lampus he, the prince of men,
Son of Laomedon); from close at hand
Forward he sprang, and thrust at Meges’ shield;
But him the solid corslet which he wore,
With breast and back-piece fitted, sav’d from harm:*
The corslet Phyleus brought from Ephyra,
By Selles’ stream; Euphetes, King of men,
Bestow’d it as a friendly gift, to wear
In battle for a guard from hostile spears;
Which from destruction now preserv’d his son.
Next Meges struck, with keen-edg’d spear, the crown
Of Dolops’ brass-bound, horsehair-crested helm,
Sev’ring the horsehair plume, which, brilliant late
With crimson dye, now lay defil’d in dust.
Yet fought he on, and still for vict’ry hop’d;
But warlike Menelaus to the aid
Of Meges came; of Dolops unobserv’d
He stood, and from behind his shoulder pierc’d;
The point, its course pursuing, through his breast
Was driv’n, and headlong on his face he fell.
Forthwith, advanc’d the two to seize the spoils;
But loudly Hector on his kinsmen call’d;
On all, but chief on Icetaon’s son,
The valiant Melanippus; he erewhile,
In far Percote, ere the foes appear’d,
Pastur’d his herds; but when the ships of Greece
Approach’d the shore, to Ilium back he came;
There, ’mid the Trojans eminent, he dwelt
In Priam’s house, belov’d as Priam’s son.
Him Hector call’d by name, and thus address’d:

“Why, Melanippus, stand we idly thus?
Doth not thy slaughter’d kinsmen touch thy heart?
See how they rush on Dolops’ arms to seize;
Then on! no distant war must now be wag’d,
But hand to hand, till or the Greeks be slain,
Or lofty Troy, with all her children, fall.”

He said, and led the way; him follow’d straight
The godlike chief; great Ajax Telamon
Meanwhile the Greeks encourag’d to the fight,
And cried, “Brave comrades, quit ye now like men;
Bear a stout heart; and in the stubborn fight
Let each to other mutual succour give;
By mutual succour more are sav’d than fall;
In timid flight nor fame nor safety lies.”

He said; and pond’ring well his words, they stood,
Firm in defence; as with a wall of brass
The ships they guarded; though against them Jove
Led on the Trojans; Menelaus then
With stirring words Antilochus address’d:
“Antilochus, than thou, of all the Greeks
Is none more active, or more light of foot;
None stronger hurls the spear; then from the crowd
Spring forth, and aim to reach some Trojan’s life.”

Thus saying, he withdrew; fir’d by his words,
Forth sprang the youth, and pois’d his glitt’ring spear,
Glancing around him; back the Trojans drew
Before his aim; nor flew the spear in vain;
But through the breast it pierc’d, as on he came,
Brave Melanippus, Icetaon’s son.
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Forth sprang Antilochus, as springs a hound
Upon a fawn, which from its lair disturb’d
A hunter’s shaft has struck, and quell’d its pow’rs;
So, Melanippus, sprang to seize thy spoils
The stout Antilochus; but not unmark’d
Of Hector’s eye, who, hast’ning through the press,
Advanc’d to meet him; waited not th’ attack,
Bold warrior as he was, Antilochus,
But trembling fled: as when a beast of prey,
Conscious of evil deed, amid the herd
The guardian dog or herdsman’s self has slain,
And flies, ere yet th’ avenging crowd collect;
So fled the son of Nestor; onward press’d,
By Hector led, the Trojans; loud their shouts,
As on the Greeks their murd’rous shafts they pour’d:
Yet turn’d he, when his comrades’ ranks he reach’d.
Then on the ships, as rav’ning lions, fell
The Trojans: they but work’d the will of Jove,
Who still their courage rais’d, and quell’d the Greeks;
Of vict’ry these debarr’d, and those inspir’d;
For so he will’d, that Hector, Priam’s son,
Should wrap in fire the beaked ships of Greece,
And Thetis to the uttermost obtain
Her over-bold petition; yet did Jove,
The Lord of counsel, wait but to behold
The flames ascending from the blazing ships:
For from that hour the Trojans, backward driv’n,
Should to the Greeks the final triumph leave.
With such design, to seize the ships, he fir’d
Th’ already burning zeal of Priam’s son;
Fiercely he rag’d, as terrible as Mars
With brandish’d spear; or as a raging fire
’Mid the dense thickets on the mountain side.
The foam was on his lips; bright flash’d his eyes
Beneath his awful brows, and terribly
Above his temples wav’d amid the fray
The helm of Hector; Jove himself from Heav’n.
His guardian hand extending, him alone
With glory crowning ’mid the host of men;
But short his term of glory: for the day
Was fast approaching, when, with Pallas’ aid,
The might of Peleus’ son should work his doom.
Oft he essay’d to break the ranks, where’er
The densest and throng noblest arms he saw;
But strenuous though his efforts, all were vain:
They, mass’d in close array, his charge withstood;
Firm as a craggy rock, upstanding high,
Close by the hoary sea, which meets unmov’d
The boist’rous currents of the whistling winds,
And the big waves that bellow round its base;
So stood unmov’d the Greeks, and undismay’d.
At length, all blazing in his arms, he sprang
Upon the mass; so plunging down, as when
On some tall vessel, from beneath the clouds
A giant billow, tempest-nurs’d, descends;
The deck is drench’d in foam; the stormy wind
Howls in the shrouds; th’ affrighted seamen quail
In fear, but little way from death remov’d;
So quail’d the spirit in ev’ry Grecian breast.

As when a rav’ning lion on a herd
Of heifers falls, which on some marshy mead
Feed numberless, beneath the care of one,
Unskill’d from beasts of prey to guard his charge;
And while beside the front or rear he walks,
The lion on th’ unguarded centre springs,
Seizes on one, and scatters all the rest;
So Hector, led by Jove, in wild alarm
Scatter’d the Grecians all; but one alone,
Brave Periphetes, of Mycenæ, slew;
The son of Copreus, whom Eurystheus sent
His envoy to the might of Hercules;
Far nobler than the father was the son;
In speed of foot, in warlike might, in mind,
In all, among Mycenians foremost he;
Who now on Hector fresh renown conferr’d;
For, backward as he stepp’d, against the rim
Of the broad shield which for defence he bore,
Down reaching to his feet, he tripp’d, and thus
Entangled, backward fell; and as he fell,
Around his temples clatter’d loud his helm.
Hector beheld, and o’er him stood in haste,
And with his spear transfix’d his breast, and slew
Before his comrades’ eyes; yet dar’d not one,
Though grieving for their comrade’s loss, advance
To rescue; such of Hector was their awe.
They fronted now the ships; the leading prows
Which first were drawn on shore, still barr’d their way;
Yet on they stream’d; and from the foremost ships,
Now hardly press’d, the Greeks perforce retir’d;
But closely mass’d before the tents they stood,
Not scatter’d o’er the camp; by shame restrain’d,
And fear; and loudly each exhorted each.
Gerenian Nestor chief, the prop of Greece,
Thus by their fathers singly each adjur’d:
“Quit ye like men, dear friends; and think it shame
To forfeit now the praise of other men;
Let each man now his children and his wife,
His fortunes and his parents, bear in mind;
And not the living only, but the dead;
For them, the absent, I, your suppliant, pray,
That firm ye stand, and scorn disgraceful flight.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast;
And from their eyeballs Pallas purg’d away
The film of darkness; and on ev’ry side,
Both tow’rd the ships and tow’rd the level fight,
Clear light diffus’d; there Hector they discern’d,
And all his comrades, those who stood aloof,
And those who near the ships maintain’d the war.
Then was not Ajax’ mighty soul content
To stand where stood the other sons of Greece;
Along the vessels’ lofty decks he mov’d
With haughty stride; a pond’rous boarding-pike,
Well polish’d, and with rivets well secur’d,
Of two and twenty cubits’ length, he bore,
As one well-skill’d in feats of horsemanship,
Who from a troop of horses on the plain
Has parted four, and down the crowded road,
While men and women all in wonder gaze,
Drives tow’rd the city; and with force untir’d
From one to other springs, as on they fly;
O’er many a vessel’s deck so Ajax pass’d
With lofty stride, and voice that reach’d to Heav’n,
As loudly shouting on the Greeks he call’d
To save their ships and tents: nor Hector stay’d
Amid the closely buckler’d Trojan ranks;
But, as upon a flock of birds, that feed
Beside a river’s bank, or geese, or cranes,
Or long-neck’d swans, a fiery eagle swoops;
So on the dark-prow’d ship with furious rush
Swept Hector down; him Jove with mighty hand
Sustain’d, and with him forward urg’d the crowd.
Fierce round the ships again the battle rag’d;
Well might ye deem no previous toil had worn
Their strength, who in that dread encounter met;
With edge so keen, and stubborn will they fought.
But varying far their hopes and fears: the Greeks
Of safety and escape from death despair’d;
While high the hopes in ev’ry Trojan’s breast,
To burn the ships, and slay the warlike Greeks;
So minded each, oppos’d in arms they stood.

On a swift-sailing vessel’s stern, that bore
Protesilaus to the coast of Troy,
But to his native country bore not thence,
Hector had laid his hand; around that ship
Trojans and Greeks in mutual slaughter join’d.
The arrow’s or the jav’lin’s distant flight
They waited not, but, fir’d with equal rage,
Fought hand to hand, with axe and hatchet keen,
And mighty swords, and double-pointed spears.
Many a fair-hilted blade, with iron bound,
Dropp’d from the hands, or from the sever’d arms,
Of warrior chiefs; the dark earth ran with blood:
Yet loos’d not Hector of the stern his hold,
But grasp’d the poop, and on the Trojans call’d;

“Bring fire, and all together loud and clear
Your war-cry raise; this day will Jove repay
Our labours all, with capture of those ships,
Which hither came, against the will of Heav’n,
And which on us unnumber’d ills have brought,
By our own Elders’ fault, who me, desiring
Ev’n at their vessels’ sterns to urge the war,
Withheld, and to the town the troops confin’d.
But Jove all-seeing, if he then o’errul’d
Our better mind, himself is now our aid.”

Thus he: they onward press’d with added zeal;
Nor Ajax yet endur’d, by hostile spears
Now sorely gall’d; yet but a little space,
Back to the helmsman’s sev’n-foot board he mov’d,
Expecting death; and left the lofty deck,
Where long he stood on guard; but still his spear
The Trojans kept aloof, whoe’er essay’d
Amid the ships to launch th’ unwearied flames;
And, loudly shouting, to the Greeks he call’d:

“Friends, Grecian heroes, ministers of Mars,
Quit ye like men! dear friends, remember now
Your wonted valour! think ye in your rear
To find supporting forces, or some fort
Whose walls may give you refuge from your foe?
No city is nigh, whose well-appointed tow’rs,
Mann’d by a friendly race, may give us aid;
But here, upon the well-arm’d Trojans’ soil,
And only resting on the sea, we lie
Far from our country; not in faint retreat,
But in our own good arms, our safety lies.”

He said; and with his sharp-edg’d spear his words
He follow’d up; if any Trojan dar’d,
By Hector’s call inspir’d, with fiery brand
To assail the ships, him with his ponderous spear
Would Ajax meet; and thus before the ships
Twelve warriors, hand to hand, his prowess felt.



ARGUMENT.

THE SIXTH BATTLE; THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS.


Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book)
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks
with Achilles’ troops and armour. He agrees to it, but at the same time
charges him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without farther
pursuit of the enemy. The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers of
Achilles are described. Achilles offers a libation for the success of
his friend, after which Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The
Trojans, at the sight of Patroclus in Achilles’ armour, taking him for
that hero, are cast into the utmost consternation: he beats them off
from the vessels, Hector himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though
Jupiter was averse to his fate. Several other particulars of the battle
are described; in the heat of which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders
of Achilles, pursues the foe to the walls of Troy; where Apollo
repulses and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him:
which concludes the book.

BOOK XVI.

Thus round the well-mann’d ship they wag’d the war:
Meanwhile by Peleus’ son Patroclus stood,
Weeping hot tears; as some dark-water’d fount
Pours o’er a craggy rock its gloomy stream;
Achilles, swift of foot, with pity saw,
And to his friend these winged words address’d:

“Why weeps Patroclus, like an infant girl,
That prays her mother, by whose side she runs,
To take her up; and, clinging to her gown,
Impedes her way, and still with tearful eyes
Looks in her face, until she take her up?
Ev’n as that girl, Patroclus, such art thou,
Shedding soft tears: hast thou some tidings brought
Touching the gen’ral weal, or me alone?
Or have some evil news from Phthia come,
Known but to thee? Menoetius, Actor’s son,
Yet surely lives; and ’mid his Myrmidons
Lives aged Peleus, son of Æacus:
Their deaths indeed might well demand our tears:
Or weep’st thou for the Greeks, who round their ships
By death their former insolence repay?
Speak out, that I may know thy cause of grief.”

To whom, with bitter groans, Patroclus thus:
“O son of Peleus, noblest of the Greeks,
Achilles, be not wroth! such weight of woe
The Grecian camp oppresses; in their ships
They who were late their bravest and their best,
Sore wounded all by spear or arrow lie;
The valiant son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Pierc’d by a shaft, Ulysses by a spear,
And Agamemnon’s self; Eurypylus
By a sharp arrow through the thigh transfix’d;
For these, the large resources of their art
The leeches ply, and on their wounds attend;
While thou, Achilles, still remain’st unmov’d.
Oh, be it never mine to nurse such hate
As thou retain’st, inflexibly severe!
Who e’er may hope in future days by thee
To profit, if thou now forbear to save
The Greeks from shame and loss? Unfeeling man!
Sure Peleus, horseman brave, was ne’er thy sire,
Nor Thetis bore thee; from the cold grey sea
And craggy rocks thou hadst thy birth; so hard
And stubborn is thy soul. But if the fear
Of evil prophesied thyself restrain,
Or message by thy Goddess-mother brought
From Jove, yet send me forth with all thy force
Of Myrmidons, to be the saving light
Of Greece; and let me to the battle bear
Thy glitt’ring arms, if so the men of Troy,
Scar’d by thy likeness, may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.
Fresh and unwearied, we may drive with ease
To their own city, from our ships and tents,
The Trojans, worn and battle-wearied men.”

Thus pray’d he, all unwisely; for the pray’r
He utter’d, to himself was fraught with death;
To whom, much griev’d, Achilles, swift of foot:
“Heav’n-born Patroclus, oh, what words are these!
Of prophecy I reck not, though I know;
Nor message hath my mother brought from Jove;
But it afflicts my soul; when one I see
That basely robs his equal of his prize,
His lawful prize, by highest valour won;
Such grief is mine, such wrong have I sustain’d.
Her, whom the sons of Greece on me bestow’d,
Prize of my spear, the well-wall’d city storm’d,
The mighty Agamemnon, Atreus’ son,
Hath borne by force away, as from the hands
Of some dishonour’d, houseless vagabond.
But let the past be past; I never meant
My wrath should have no end; yet had not thought
My anger to abate, till my own ships
Should hear the war-cry, and the battle bear,
But go, and in my well-known armour clad,
Lead forth the valiant Myrmidons to war,
Since the dark cloud of Trojans circles round
The ships in force; and on the shingly beach,
Pent up in narrow limits, lie the Greeks;
And all the city hath pour’d its numbers forth
In hope undoubting; for they see no more
My helm among them flashing; else in flight
Their dead would choke the streams, if but to me
Great Agamemnon bore a kindly mind:
But round the camp the battle now is wag’d.
No more the hands of valiant Diomed,
The Greeks protecting, hurl his fiery spear;
Nor hear I now, from his detested lips,
The shout of Agamemnon; all around
Is heard the warrior-slayer Hector’s voice,
Cheering his Trojans; with triumphant cries
They, from the vanquish’d Greeks, hold all the plain.
Nathless do thou, Patroclus, in defence
Fall boldly on, lest they with blazing fire
Our ships destroy, and hinder our retreat.
But hear, and ponder well the end of all
I have to say, and so for me obtain
Honour and glory in the eyes of Greece;
And that the beauteous maiden to my arms
They may restore, with costly gifts to boot.
The ships reliev’d, return forthwith; and though
The Thund’rer, Juno’s Lord, should crown thine arms
With triumph, be not rash, apart from me,
In combat with the warlike sons of Troy;
 (So should my name in less repute be held;)
Nor, in the keen excitement of the fight
And slaughter of the Trojans, lead thy troops
On tow’rd the city, lest thou find thyself
By some one of th’ immortal Gods oppos’d;
For the far-darting Phoebus loves them well;
But when in safety thou hast plac’d the ships,
Delay not to return, and leave the rest
To battle on the plain: for would to Jove,
To Pallas and Apollo, that not one,
Or Greek or Trojan, might escape from death,
Save only thou and I; that so we two
Alone might raze the sacred tow’rs of Troy.”

Such converse held they; while by hostile spears
Hard press’d, no longer Ajax might endure;
At once by Jove’s high will and Trojan foes
O’ermaster’d; loud beneath repeated blows
Clatter’d around his brow the glitt’ring helm,
As on the well-wrought crest the weapons fell;
And his left arm grew faint, that long had borne
The burthen of his shield; yet nought avail’d
The press of spears to drive him from his post;
Lab’ring he drew his breath, his ev’ry limb
With sweat was reeking; breathing space was none;
Blow follow’d blow; and ills were heap’d on ill.

Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
How first the fire assail’d the Grecian ships.

Hector approach’d, and on the ashen spear
Of Ajax, close behind the head, let fall
His mighty sword; right through he clove the wood;
And in his hand the son of Telamon
The headless shaft held bootless; far away,
Loud ringing, fell to earth the brazen point.
Ajax, dismayed, perceived the hand of Heaven,
And knew that Jove the Thunderer had decreed
To thwart his hopes, and victory give to Troy.
Slow he retir’d; and to the vessel they
The blazing torch applied; high rose the flame
Unquenchable, and wrapp’d the poop in fire.
The son of Peleus saw, and with his palm
Smote on his thigh, and to Patroclus call’d:
“Up, nobly born Patroclus, car-borne chief!
Up, for I see above the ships ascend
The hostile fires; and lest they seize the ships,
And hinder our retreat, do thou in haste
Thine armour don, while I arouse the troops.”

He said: his dazzling arms Patroclus donn’d:
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his ample chest
The breastplate of Achilles, swift of foot,
Star-spangled, richly wrought, defended well;
Around his shoulders slung, his sword he bore,
Brass-bladed, silver-studded; next his shield
Weighty and strong; and on his firm-set head
A helm he wore, well-wrought, with horsehair plume
That nodded, fearful, o’er his brow; his hand
Grasp’d two stout spears, familiar to his hold.
One spear Achilles had, long, pond’rous, tough;
But this he touch’d not; none of all the Greeks,
None, save Achilles’ self, that spear could poise;
The far-fam’d Pelian ash, which to his sire,
On Pelion’s summit fell’d, to be the bane
Of mightiest chiefs, the Centaur Chiron gave.
Then to Automedon he gave command
To yoke the horses: him he honour’d most,
Next to Achilles’ self; the trustiest he
In battle to await his chief’s behest.
The flying steeds he harness’d to the car,
Xanthus and Balius, fleeter than the winds;
Whom, grazing in the marsh by ocean’s stream,
Podarge, swift of foot, to Zephyr bore:
And by their side the matchless Pedasus,
Whom from the capture of Eetion’s town
Achilles bore away; a mortal horse,
But with immortal coursers meet to vie.

Meantime Achilles, through their several tents,
Summon’d to arms the warlike Myrmidons.
They all, like rav’ning wolves, of courage high,
That on the mountain side have hunted down
An antler’d stag, and batten’d on his flesh:
Their chaps all dyed with blood, in troops they go,
With their lean tongues from some black-water’d fount
To lap the surface of the dark cool wave,
Their jaws with blood yet reeking, unsubdued
Their courage, and their bellies gorg’d with flesh;
So round Pelides’ valiant follower throng’d
The chiefs and rulers of the Myrmidons.
Achilles in the midst to charioteers
And buckler’d warriors issued his commands.
Fifty swift ships Achilles, dear to Jove,
Led to the coast of Troy; and rang’d in each
Fifty brave comrades mann’d the rowers’ seats.
O’er these five chiefs, on whom he most relied,
He plac’d, himself the Sov’reign Lord of all.
One band Menestheus led, with glancing mail,
Son of Sperchius, Heav’n-descended stream;
Him Peleus’ daughter, Polydora fair,
A mortal in a God’s embrace compress’d,
To stout Sperchius bore; but, by repute,
To Boras, Perieres’ son, who her
In public, and with ample dow’r, espous’d.
The brave Eudorus led the second band,
Whom Phylas’ daughter, Polymele fair,
To Hermes bore; the maid he saw, and lov’d,
Amid the virgins, mingling in the dance
Of golden-shafted Dian, Huntress-Queen;
He to her chamber access found, and gain’d
By stealth her bed; a valiant son she bore,
Eudorus, swift of foot, in battle strong.
But when her infant, by Lucina’s aid,
Was brought to light, and saw the face of day,
Her to his home, with ample dow’r enrich’d,
Echecles, son of Actor, bore away;
While him the aged Phylas kept, and nurs’d
With tender care, and cherish’d—as his own.
The brave Peisander, son of Maemalus,
The third commanded; of the Myrmidons,
Next to Pelides’ friend, the noblest spear.
The fourth, the aged warrior Phoenix led;
The fifth, Alcimedon, Laerces’ son:
These in their order due Achilles first
Array’d, and next with stirring words address’d:

“Ye Myrmidons, forget not now the vaunts
Which, while my wrath endur’d, ye largely pour’d
Upon the Trojans; me ye freely blam’d;
‘Ill-omen’d son of Peleus, sure in wrath
Thou wast conceiv’d, implacable, who here
In idleness enforc’d thy comrades keep’st!
’Twere better far our homeward way to take,
If such pernicious rancour fill thy soul!’
Thus ye reproach’d me oft! Lo! now ye have
The great occasion which your souls desir’d!
Then on, and with brave hearts the Trojans meet!”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast,
And more compact, beneath their monarch’s eye,
Their ranks were form’d; as when the builder lays
The closely-fitting stones, to form the wall
Of some great house, and brave the winds of Heav’n;
So close were fitted helm and bossy shield;
Buckler on buckler press’d, and helm on helm,
And man on man; the horsehair plumes above,
That nodded, fearful, from the warriors’ brows,
Each other touch’d; so closely mass’d they stood.
Before them all stood prominent in arms
Two chiefs, Patroclus and Automedon,
Both with one thought possess’d, to lead the fight
In the fore-front of all the Myrmidons.
Achilles then within his tent withdrew,
And of a gorgeous coffer rais’d the lid,
Well-wrought, by silver-footed Thetis plac’d
On board his ship, and fill’d with rich attire,
With store of wind-proof cloaks, and carpets soft.
There lay a goblet, richly chas’d, whence none,
But he alone, might drink the ruddy wine,
Nor might libations thence to other Gods
Be made, save only Jove: this brought he forth,
And first with sulphur purified, and next
Wash’d with pure water; then his hands he wash’d,
And drew the ruddy wine; then standing forth
Made in the centre of the court his pray’r,
And as he pour’d the wine, look’d up to Heav’n,
Not unbeheld of Jove, the lightning’s Lord:

“Great King, Dodona’s Lord, Pelasgian Jove,
Who dwell’st on high, and rul’st with sov’reign sway
Dodona’s wintry heights; where dwell around
Thy Sellian priests, men of unwashen feet,
That on the bare ground sleep; thou once before
Hast heard my pray’r, and me with honour crown’d,
And on the Greeks inflicted all thy plagues;
Hear yet again, and this my boon accord.
I ’mid the throng of ships myself remain;
But with a num’rous force of Myrmidons
I send my comrade in my stead to fight:
On him, all-seeing Jove, thy favour pour;
Strengthen his heart, that Hector’s self may learn
If, e’en alone, my follower knows to fight,
Or only then resistless pow’r displays,
When I myself the toil of battle share.
And from our vessels when the foe is driv’n,
Grant that with all his arms and comrades true
He may in safety to the ships return.”

Thus pray’d he; Jove, the Lord of counsel, heard,
And half his pray’r he granted, half denied:
For from the ships the battle to repel
He granted; but denied his safe return.
His pray’rs and off’rings ended, to the tent
Achilles turn’d again, and in the chest
Replac’d the cup; then issuing forth, he stood
Before the tent; for much he long’d to see
The Greeks and Trojans join in battle strife.
They who in arms round brave Patroclus stood
Their line of battle form’d, with courage high
To dash upon the Trojans; and as wasps
That have their nest beside the public road,
Which boys delight to vex and irritate
In wanton play, but to the gen’ral harm;
Them if some passing trav’ller unawares
Disturb, with angry courage forth they rush
In one continuous swarm, to guard their nest:
E’en with such courage pour’d the Myrmidons
Forth from the ships; then uproar wild arose,
And loud Patroclus on his comrades call’d:

“Ye valiant Myrmidons, who boast yourselves
Achilles’ comrades, quit ye now like men;
Your ancient valour prove; to Peleus’ son,
Of all the Greeks the noblest, so shall we,
His faithful followers, highest honour give;
And Agamemnon’s haughty self shall mourn
The slight on Grecia’s bravest warrior cast.”

His words fresh courage rous’d in ev’ry breast.
Thick on the Trojan host their masses fell;
While loud the fleet re-echoed to the sound
Of Grecian cheers; but when the Trojans saw,
Blazing in arms, Menoetius’ godlike son,
Himself, and follower; quail’d the spirits of all;
Their firm-set ranks were shaken; for they deem’d
Achilles had beside the ships exchang’d
His wrath for friendship; and each sev’ral man
Look’d round, to find his own escape from death.

Then first Patroclus aim’d his glitt’ring spear
Amid the crowd, where thickest round the ships
Of brave Protesilaus, raged the war;
And struck Pyraechmes, who from Amydon,
From the wide-flowing stream of Axius, led
The horsehair-crested Paeons; him he struck
Through the right shoulder; backwards in the dust
Groaning, he fell; around him quail’d with fear
His Paeons all, such terror in their ranks
Patroclus threw, their bravest leader slain,
The foremost in the fight; the crowd he drove
Far from the ships, and quench’d the blazing fire.
There lay the half-burnt ship; with shouts confus’d
The Trojans fled; and from amid the ships
Forth pour’d the Greeks; and loud the clamour rose.

As when around a lofty mountain’s top
The lightning’s Lord dispels a mass of cloud,
And ev’ry crag, and ev’ry jutting peak
Is plainly seen, and ev’ry forest glade;
And the deep vault of Heav’n is open’d wide;
So when the Greeks had clear’d the ships of fire,
They breath’d awhile; yet ceas’d not so the strife;
For not in headlong panic from the ships
The Trojans by the valiant Greeks were driv’n,
But, though perforce retiring, still made head.

Then of the chiefs, as wider spread the fight,
Each singled each; Menoetius’ noble son
First threw his pointed spear, and on the thigh
Struck Areilochus, in act to turn;
Right through the point was driv’n; the weighty spear
Shatter’d the bone, and prone to earth he fell.
The warlike Menelaus aim’d his spear
Where Thoas’ breast, unguarded by his shield,
Was left expos’d; and slack’d his limbs in death.
Phyleus’ brave son, as rush’d Amphiclus on,
Stood firm, with eye observant; then th’ attack
Preventing, through his thigh, high up, where lie
The strongest muscles, smote; the weapon’s point
Sever’d the tendons; darkness clos’d his eyes.
Of Nestor’s sons, Antilochus, the first,
Atymnius wounded, driving through his flank
He brazen spear; prone on his face he fell.
Then, burning to avenge his brother’s death,
Stood Maris o’er the corpse, and hand to hand
Engaged Antilochus; but ere a blow
Was struck, the godlike Thrasymedes drove
Through his right shoulder, with unerring aim,
His glitt’ring spear; the point his upper arm
Tore from the muscles, shatt’ring all the bone:
Thund’ring he fell, and darkness clos’d his eyes.
So to the shades, by those two brethren’s hands
Subdued, Sarpedon’s comrades brave were sent,
The sons of Amisodarus, who rear’d
The dread Chimaera, bane of mortal men.
On Cleobulus, wounded in the press,
Ajax Oileus sprang, and captive took,
Alive; but sudden on his neck let fall
His hilted sword, and quench’d the fire of life.
The hot blood dyed the sword; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous fate, his eyes o’erspread.
Then Peneleus and Lycon, hand to hand,
Engag’d in combat; both had miss’d their aim,
And bootless hurl’d their weapons; then with swords
They met; first Lycon on the crested helm
Dealt a fierce blow; but in his hand the blade
Up to the hilt was shiver’d; then the sword
Of Peneleus his neck, below the ear,
Dissever’d; deeply in his throat the blade
Was plung’d, and by the skin alone was stay’d;
Down droop’d his head, his limbs relax’d in death.
Meriones by speed of foot o’ertook,
And, as his car he mounted, Acarnas
Though the right shoulder pierc’d; down from the car
He fell; the shades of death his eyes o’erspread.
Full on the mouth of Erymas was thrust
The weapon of Idomeneus; right through,
The white bones crashing, pass’d the brazen spear
Below the brain; his teeth were shatter’d all;
With blood, which with convulsive sobs he blew
From mouth and nostril, both his eyes were fill’d;
And death’s dark cloud encompass’d him around.
Thus slew the Grecian leaders each his man.

As rav’ning wolves, that lambs or kids assail,
Stray’d from their dams, by careless shepherds left
Upon the mountain scatter’d; these they see,
And tear at once their unresisting prey;
So on the Trojans fell the Greeks; in rout
Disastrous they, unmann’d by terror, fled.
Great Ajax still, unwearied, long’d to hurl
His spear at Hector of the brazen helm;
But he, well skill’d in war, his shoulders broad
Protected by his shield of tough bull’s hide,
Watch’d for the whizzing shafts, and jav’lins’ whirr.
Full well he knew the tide of battle turn’d,
Yet held his ground, his trusty friends to save.

As from Olympus, o’er the clear blue sky
Pour the dark clouds, when Jove the vault of Heav’n
O’erspreads with storm and tempest, from the ships
So pour’d with panic cries the flying host,
And in disorder’d rout recross’d the trench.
Then Hector’s flying coursers bore him safe
Far from the struggling masses, whom the ditch
Detain’d perforce; there many a royal car
With broken pole th’ unharness’d horses left.
On, shouting to the Greeks, Patroclus press’d
The flying Trojans; they, with panic cries,
Dispers’d, the roads encumber’d; high uprose
The storms of dust, as from the tents and ships
Back to the city stretch’d the flying steeds;
And ever where the densest throng appear’d
With furious threats Patroclus urg’d his course;
His glowing axle trac’d by prostrate men
Hurl’d from their cars, and chariots overthrown.
Flew o’er the deep-sunk trench th’ immortal steeds,
The noble prize the Gods to Peleus gave,
Still onward straining; for he long’d to reach,
And hurl his spear at Hector; him meanwhile
His flying steeds in safety bore away.

As in th’ autumnal season, when the earth
With weight of rain is saturate; when Jove
Pours down his fiercest storms in wrath to men,
Who in their courts unrighteous judgments pass,
And justice yield to lawless violence,
The wrath of Heav’n despising; ev’ry stream
Is brimming o’er: the hills in gullies deep
Are by the torrents seam’d, which, rushing down
From the high mountains to the dark-blue sea,
With groans and tumult urge their headlong course,
Wasting the works of man; so urg’d their flight,
So, as they fled, the Trojan horses groan’d.
The foremost ranks cut off, back tow’rd the ships
Patroclus drove them, baffling their attempts
To gain the city; and in middle space
Between the ships, the stream, and lofty wall,
Dealt slaughter round him, and of many a chief
The bitter penalty of death requir’d.
Then Pronous with his glitt’ring spear he struck,
Where by the shield his breast was left expos’d,
And slack’d his limbs in death; thund’ring he fell.
Next Thestor, son of Œnops, he assail’d;
He on his polish’d car, down-crouching, sat,
His mind by fear disorder’d; from his hands
The reins had dropp’d; him, thrusting with the spear,
Through the right cheek and through the teeth he smote,
Then dragg’d him, by the weapon, o’er the rail.
As when an angler on a prominent rock
Drags from the sea to shore with hook and line
A weighty fish; so him Patroclus dragg’d,
Gaping, from off the car; and dash’d him down
Upon his face; and life forsook his limbs.
Next Eryalus, eager for the fray,
On the mid forehead with a mighty stone
He struck; beneath the pond’rous helmet’s weight
The skull was split in twain; prostrate he fell,
By life-consuming death encompass’d round.
Forthwith Amphoterus, and Erymas,
Epaltes, Echius, and Tlepolemus,
Son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus brave,
Euippus, Polymelus, Argeas’ son,
In quick succession to the ground he brought.
Sarpedon his ungirdled forces saw
Promiscuous fall before Menoetius’ son,
And to the Lycians call’d in loud reproof:
“Shame, Lycians! whither fly ye? why this haste?
I will myself this chief confront, and learn
Who this may be of bearing proud and high,
Who on the Trojans grievous harm hath wrought,
And many a warrior’s limbs relax’d in death.”

He said, and from his car, accoutred, sprang;
Patroclus saw, and he too leap’d to earth.
As on a lofty rock, with angry screams,
Hook-beak’d, with talons curv’d, two vultures fight;
So with loud shouts these two to battle rush’d.
The son of Saturn pitying saw, and thus
To Juno spoke, his sister and his wife:

“Woe, woe! that fate decrees my best-belov’d,
Sarpedon, by Patroclus’ hand to fall;
E’en now conflicting thoughts my soul divide,
To bear him from the fatal strife unhurt,
And set him down on Lycia’s fertile plains,
Or leave him by Patroclus’ hand to fall.”

Whom, answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
Wouldst thou a mortal man from death withdraw
Long since by fate decreed? Do what thou wilt;
Yet cannot we, the rest, applaud thine act.
This too I say, and turn it in thy mind:
If to his home Sarpedon thou restore
Alive, bethink thee, will not other Gods
Their sons too from the stubborn fight withdraw?
For in the field around the walls of Troy
Are many sons of Gods, in all of whom
This act of thine will angry feelings rouse.
But if thou love him, and thy soul deplore
His coming doom, yet in the stubborn fight
Leave him beneath Patroclus’ hand to fall:
Then, when his spirit hath fled, the charge assign
To Death and gentle Sleep, that in their arms
They bear him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains:
There shall his brethren and his friends perform
His fun’ral rites, and mound and column raise,
The fitting tribute to the mighty dead.”

Thus she; the Sire of Gods and men complied:
But to the ground some drops of blood let fall,
In honour of his son, whom fate decreed,
Far from his country, on the fertile plains
Of Troy to perish by Patroclus’ hand.
As near the champions drew, Patroclus first
His weapon hurl’d, and Thrasymedes brave,
The faithful follower of Sarpedon, struck
Below the waist, and slack’d his limbs in death.
Thrown in his turn, Sarpedon’s glitt’ring spear
Flew wide; and Pedasus, the gallant horse,
Through the right shoulder wounded; with a scream
He fell, and in the dust breath’d forth his life,
As, shrieking loud, his noble spirit fled.
This way and that his two companions swerv’d;
Creak’d the strong yoke, and tangled were the reins,
As in the dust the prostrate courser lay.
Automedon the means of safety saw;
And drawing from beside his brawny thigh
His keen-edg’d sword, with no uncertain blow
Cut loose the fallen horse; again set straight,
The two, extended, stretch’d the tightened rein.
Again in mortal strife the warriors clos’d:
Once more Sarpedon hurl’d his glitt’ring spear
In vain; above Patroclus’ shoulder flew
The point, innocuous; from his hand in turn
The spear not vainly thrown, Sarpedon struck
Where lies the diaphragm, below the heart.
He fell; as falls an oak, or poplar tall,
Or lofty pine, which on the mountain top
For some proud ship the woodman’s axe hath hewn:
So he, with death-cry sharp, before his car
Extended lay, and clutch’d the blood-stain’d soil.
As when a lion on the herd has sprung,
And, ’mid the heifers seiz’d, the lordly bull
Lies bellowing, crush’d between the lion’s jaws;
So by Patroclus slain, the Lycian chief,
Undaunted still, his faithful comrade call’d:
“Good Glaucus, warrior tried, behoves thee now
Thy spearmanship to prove, and warlike might.
Welcome the fray; put forth thine utmost speed;
Call on the Lycian chiefs, on ev’ry side,
To press around, and for Sarpedon fight;
Thou too thine arms for my protection wield;
For I to thee, through all thy future days,
Shall be a ceaseless scandal and reproach,
If me, thus slain before the Grecian ships,
The Greeks be suffer’d of my arms to spoil:
But stand thou fast, and others’ courage raise.”

Thus as he spoke, the shades of death o’erspread
His eyes and nostrils; then with foot firm-set
Upon his chest, Patroclus from the corpse
Drew, by main force, the fast-adhering spear;
The life forth issuing with the weapon’s point.
Loos’d from the royal car, the snorting steeds,
Eager for flight, the Myrmidons detain’d.
Deep-grieving, Glaucus heard his voice: and chafed
His spirit within him, that he lacked the power
To aid his comrade; with his hand he grasp’d
His wounded arm, in torture from the shaft
By Teucer shot, to save the Greeks from death,
As on he pressed to scale the lofty wall:
Then to Apollo thus address’d his pray’r:

“Hear me, great King, who, as on Lycia’s plains,
Art here in Troy; and hear’st in ev’ry place
Their voice who suffer, as I suffer now.
A grievous wound I bear, and sharpest pangs
My arm assail, nor may the blood he stanch’d:
The pain weighs down my shoulder; and my hand
Hath lost its pow’r to fight, or grasp my spear.
Sarpedon, bravest of the brave, is slain,
The son of Jove; yet Jove preserv’d him not.
But thou, O King, this grievous wound relieve;
Assuage the pain, and give me strength to urge
My Lycian comrades to maintain the war,
And fight myself to guard the noble dead.”

Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r Apollo heard,
Assuag’d his pains, and from the grievous wound
Stanch’ d the dark blood, and fill’d his soul with strength.
Glaucus within himself perceiv’d, and knew,
Rejoicing, that the God had heard his pray’r.
The Lycian leaders first on ev’ry side
He urg’d to hasten for their King to fight:
Then ’mid the Trojans went with lofty step,
And first to Panthous’ son, Polydamas,
To brave Agenor and Æneas next;
Then Hector of the brazen helm himself
Approaching, thus with winged words address’d:

“Hector, forgett’st thou quite thy brave allies,
Who freely in thy cause pour forth their lives,
Far from their home and friends? but they from thee
No aid receive; Sarpedon lies in death,
The leader of the buckler’d Lycian bands,
Whose justice and whose pow’r were Lycia’s shield;
Him by Patroclus’ hand hath Mars subdued.
But, friends, stand by me now! with just revenge
Inspir’d, determine that the Myrmidons
Shall not, how griev’d soe’er for all the Greeks
Who by our spears beside the ships have fall’n,
Our dead dishonour, and his arms obtain.”

He said; and through the Trojans thrill’d the sense
Of grief intolerable, unrestrain’d;
For he, though stranger-born, was of the State
A mighty pillar; and his followers
A num’rous host; and he himself in fight
Among the foremost; so, against the Greeks,
With fiery zeal they rush’d, by Hector led,
Griev’d for Sarpedon’s loss; on th’ other side
Patroclus’ manly heart the Greeks arous’d,
And to th’ Ajaces first, themselves inflamed
With warlike zeal, he thus address’d his speech:

“Ye sons of Ajax, now is come the time
Your former fame to rival, or surpass:
The man hath fall’n, who first o’erleap’d our wall,
Sarpedon; now remains, that, having slain,
We should his corpse dishonour, and his arms
Strip off; and should some comrade dare attempt
His rescue, him too with our spears subdue.”

He said; and they, with martial ardour fir’d,
Rush’d to the conflict. When on either side
The reinforc’d battalions were array’d,
Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Greeks
Around the dead in sternest combat met,
With fearful shouts; and loud their armour rang.
Then, to enhance the horror of the strife
Around his son, with darkness Jove o’erspread
The stubborn fight: the Trojans first drove back
The keen-ey’d Greeks; for first a warrior fell,
Not of the meanest ’mid the Myrmidons,
Epegeus, son of valiant Agacles;
Who in Budaeum’s thriving state bore rule
Erewhile; but flying for a kinsman slain,
To Peleus and the silver-footed Queen
He came a suppliant; with Achilles thence
To Ilium sent, to join the war of Troy.
Him, as he stretch’d his hand to seize the dead,
Full on the forehead with a massive stone
Great Hector smote; within the pond’rous helm
The skull was split in twain; prone on the corpse
He fell, by life-destroying death subdued.
Griev’d was Patroclus for his comrade slain;
Forward he darted, as a swift-wing’d hawk,
That swoops amid the starlings and the daws;
So swift didst thou, Patroclus, car-borne chief,
Upon the Trojans and the Lycians spring,
Thy soul with anger for thy comrade fill’d.
A pond’rous stone he hurl’d at Sthenelas,
Son of Ithaemenes; the mighty mass
Fell on his neck, and all the muscles crush’d.
Back drew great Hector and the chiefs of Troy;
Far as a jav’lin’s flight, in sportive strife,
Or in the deadly battle, hurl’d by one
His utmost strength exerting; back so far
The Trojans drew, so far the Greeks pursued.
Glaucus, the leader of the Lycian spears,
First turning, slew the mighty Bathycles,
The son of Chalcon; he in Hellas dwelt,
In wealth surpassing all the Myrmidons.
Him, as he gain’d upon him in pursuit,
Quick turning, Glaucus through the breast transfix’d;
Thund’ring he fell; deep grief possess’d the Greeks
At loss of one so valiant; fiercely joy’d
The Trojans, and around him crowded thick;
Nor of their wonted valour were the Greeks
Oblivious, but still onward held their course.
Then slew Meriones a crested chief,
The bold Laogonus, Onetor’s son;
Onetor, of Idaean Jove the priest,
And by the people as a God rever’d.
Below the ear he struck him; from his limbs
The spirit fled, and darkness veil’d his eyes.

Then at Meriones Æneas threw
His brazen spear, in hopes beneath his shield
To find a spot unguarded; he beheld,
And downward stooping, shunn’d the brazen death;
Behind him far, deep in the soil infix’d,
The weapon stood; there Mars its impulse stay’d;
So, bootless hurl’d, though by no feeble hand,
Æneas’ spear stood quiv’ring in the ground;
Then thus in wrath he cried: “Meriones,
Had it but struck thee, nimble as thou art,
My spear had brought thy dancing to a close.”

To whom the spearman skill’d, Meriones:
“Brave as thou art, Æneas, ’tis too much
For thee to hope the might of all to quell,
Who dare confront thee; thou art mortal too!
And if my aim be true, and should my spear
But strike thee fair, all valiant as thou art,
And confident, yet me thy fall shall crown
With triumph, and thy soul to Hades send.”

He said; and him Menoetius’ noble son
Address’d with grave rebuke: “Meriones,
Brave warrior, why thus waste the time in words?
Trust me, good friend, ’tis not by vaunting speech,
Unseconded by deeds, that we may hope
To scare away the Trojans from the slain:
Hands are for battle, words for council meet;
Boots it not now to wrangle, but to fight.”

He said, and led the way; him follow’d straight
The godlike chief; forthwith, as loudly rings,
Amid the mountain forest’s deep recess,
The woodman’s axe, and far is heard the sound;
So from the wide-spread earth their clamour rose,
As brazen arms, and shields, and tough bull’s-hide
Encounter’d swords and double-pointed spears.
Nor might the sharpest sight Sarpedon know,
From head to foot with wounds and blood and dust
Disfigur’d; thickly round the dead they swarm’d.
As when at spring-tide in the cattle-sheds
Around the milk-cans swarm the buzzing flies,
While the warm milk is frothing in the pail;
So swarm’d they round the dead; nor Jove the while
Turn’d from the stubborn fight his piercing glance;
But still look’d down with gaze intent, and mus’d
Upon Patroclus’ coming fate, in doubt,
If he too there beside Sarpedon slain,
Should perish by illustrious Hector’s hand,
Spoil’d of his arms; or yet be spared awhile
To swell the labours of the battle-field.
He judg’d it best at length, that once again
The gallant follower of Peleus’ son
Should tow’rd the town with fearful slaughter drive
The Trojans, and their brazen-helmed chief.
First Hector’s soul with panic fear he fill’d;
Mounting his car, he fled, and urg’d to flight
The Trojans; for he saw the scales of Jove.
Then nor the valiant Lycians held their ground;
All fled in terror, as they saw their King
Pierc’d through the heart, amid a pile of dead;
For o’er his body many a warrior fell,
When Saturn’s son the conflict fierce inflam’d.
Then from Sarpedon’s breast they stripp’d his arms,
Of brass refulgent; these Menoetius’ son
Sent by his comrades to the ships of Greece.

To Phoebus then the Cloud-compeller thus:
“Hie thee, good Phoebus, from amid the spears
Withdraw Sarpedon, and from all his wounds
Cleanse the dark gore; then bear him far away,
And lave his body in the flowing stream;
Then with divine ambrosia all his limbs
Anointing, clothe him in immortal robes.
To two swift bearers give him then in charge,
To Sleep and Death, twin brothers, in their arms
To bear him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains:
There shall his brethren and his friends perform
His fun’ral rites, and mound and column raise,
The fitting tribute to the mighty dead.”

He said; obedient to his father’s words,
Down to the battle-field Apollo sped
From Ida’s height; and from amid the spears
Withdrawn, he bore Sarpedon far away,
And lav’d his body in the flowing stream;
Then with divine ambrosia all his limbs
Anointing, cloth’d him in immortal robes;
To two swift bearers gave him then in charge,
To Sleep and Death, twin brothers; in their arms
They bore him safe to Lycia’s wide-spread plains.

Then to Automedon Patroclus gave
His orders, and the flying foe pursued.
Oh much deceiv’d, insensate! had he now
But borne in mind the words of Peleus’ son,
He might have ’scap’d the bitter doom of death.
But still Jove’s will the will of man o’errules:
Who strikes with panic, and of vict’ry robs
The bravest; and anon excites to war;
Who now Patroclus’ breast with fury fill’d.
Whom then, Patroclus, first, whom slew’st thou last,
When summon’d by the Gods to meet thy doom?
Adrastus, and Autonous, Perimus
The son of Meges, and Echeclus next;
Epistor, Melanippus, Elasus,
And Mulius, and Pylartes; these he slew;
The others all in flight their safety found.

Then had the Greeks the lofty-gated town
Of Priam captur’d by Patroclus’ hand,
So forward and so fierce he bore his spear;
But on the well-built tow’r Apollo stood,
On his destruction bent, and Troy’s defence
The jutting angle of the lofty wall
Patroclus thrice assail’d; his onset thrice
Apollo, with his own immortal hands
Repelling, backward thrust his glitt’ring shield.
But when again, with more than mortal force
He made his fourth attempt, with awful mien
And threat’ning voice the Far-destroyer spoke:

“Back, Heav’n-born chief, Patroclus! not to thee
Hath fate decreed the triumph to destroy
The warlike Trojans’ city; no, nor yet
To great Achilles, mightier far than thou.”

Thus as he spoke, Patroclus backward stepp’d,
Shrinking before the Far-destroyer’s wrath.
Still Hector kept before the Scaean gates
His coursers; doubtful, if again to dare
The battle-throng, or summon all the host
To seek the friendly shelter of the wall.
Thus as he mus’d, beside him Phoebus stood,
In likeness of a warrior stout and brave,
Brother of Hecuba, the uncle thence
Of noble Hector, Asius, Dymas’ son;
Who dwelt in Phrygia, by Saugarius’ stream;
His form assuming, thus Apollo spoke:
“Hector, why shrink’st thou from the battle thus?
It ill beseems thee! Would to Heav’n that I
So far thy greater were, as thou art mine;
Then sorely shouldst thou rue this abstinence.
But, forward thou! against Patroclus urge
Thy fiery steeds, so haply by his death
Apollo thee with endless fame may crown.”

This said, the God rejoin’d the strife of men;
And noble Hector bade Cebriones
Drive ’mid the fight his car; before him mov’d
Apollo, scatt’ring terror ’mid the Greeks,
And lustre adding to the arms of Troy.
All others Hector pass’d unnotic’d by,
Nor stay’d to slay; Patroclus was the mark
At which his coursers’ clatt’ring hoofs he drove.
On th’ other side, Patroclus from his car
Leap’d to the ground: his left hand held his spear;
And in the right a pond’rous mass he bore
Of rugged stone, that fill’d his ample grasp:
The stone he hurl’d; not far it miss’d its mark,
Nor bootless flew; but Hector’s charioteer
It struck, Cebriones, a bastard son
Of royal Priam, as the reins he held.
Full on his temples fell the jagged mass,
Drove both his eyebrows in, and crush’d the bone;
Before him in the dust his eyeballs fell;
And, like a diver, from the well-wrought car
Headlong he plung’d; and life forsook his limbs.
O’er whom Patroclus thus with bitter jest:
“Heav’n! what agility! how deftly thrown
That somersault! if only in the sea
Such feats he wrought, with him might few compete,
Diving for oysters, if with such a plunge
He left his boat, how rough soe’er the waves,
As from his car he plunges to the ground:
Troy can, it seems, accomplish’d tumblers boast.”

Thus saying, on Cebriones he sprang,
As springs a lion, through the breast transfix’d,
In act the sheepfold to despoil, and dies
The victim of his courage; so didst thou
Upon Cebriones, Patroclus, spring.
Down from his car too Hector leap’d to earth.
So, o’er Cebriones, oppos’d they stood;
As on the mountain, o’er a slaughter’d stag,
Both hunger-pinch’d, two lions fiercely fight,
So o’er Cebriones two mighty chiefs,
Menoetius’ son and noble Hector, strove,
Each in the other bent to plunge his spear.
The head, with grasp unyielding, Hector held;
Patroclus seiz’d the foot; and, crowding round,
Trojans and Greeks in stubborn conflict clos’d.

As when, encount’ring in some mountain-glen,
Eurus and Notus shake the forest deep,
Of oak, or ash, or slender cornel-tree,
Whose tap’ring branches are together thrown,
With fearful din, and crash of broken boughs;
So mix’d confus’dly, Greeks and Trojans fought,
No thought of flight by either entertain’d.
Thick o’er Cebriones the jav’lins flew,
And feather’d arrows, bounding from the string;
And pond’rous stones that on the bucklers rang,
As round the dead they fought; amid the dust
That eddying rose, his art forgotten all,
A mighty warrior, mightily he lay.
While in mid Heav’n the sun pursued his course,
Thick flew the shafts, and fast the people fell
On either side; but when declining day
Brought on the hour that sees the loosen’d steers,
The Greeks were stronger far; and from the darts
And Trojan battle-cry Cebriones
They drew, and from his breast his armour stripp’d.
Fiercely Patroclus on the Trojans fell:
Thrice he assail’d them, terrible as Mars,
With fearful shouts; and thrice nine foes he slew:
But when again, with more than mortal force
His fourth assault he made, thy term of life,
Patroclus, then approach’d its final close;
For Phoebus’ awful self encounter’d thee,
Amid the battle-throng, of thee unseen,
For thickest darkness shrouded all his form:
He stood behind, and with extended palm
Dealt on Patroclus’ neck and shoulders broad
A mighty buffet; dizzy swam his eyes,
And from his head Apollo snatch’d the helm;
Clank’d, as it roll’d beneath the horses’ feet,
The visor’d helm; the horsehair plume with blood
And dust polluted; never till that day
Was that proud helmet so with dust defil’d,
That wont to deck a godlike chief, and guard
Achilles’ noble head, and graceful brow:
Now by the will of Jove to Hector giv’n.
Now death was near at hand; and in his grasp
His spear was shiver’d, pond’rous, long, and tough,
Brass-pointed; with its belt, the ample shield
Fell from his shoulders; and Apollo’s hand,
The royal son of Jove, his corslet loos’d.
Then was his mind bewilder’d; and his limbs
Gave way beneath him; all aghast he stood:
Him, from behind, a Dardan, Panthous’ son,
Euphorbus, peerless ’mid the Trojan youth,
To hurl the spear, to run, to drive the car,
Approaching close, between the shoulders stabb’d;
He, train’d to warfare, from his car, ere this
A score of Greeks had from their chariots hurl’d:
Such was the man who thee, Patroclus, first
Wounded, but not subdued; the ashen spear
He, in all haste, withdrew; nor dar’d confront
Patroclus, though disarm’d, in deadly strife.

Back to his comrades’ shelt’ring ranks retir’d,
From certain death, Patroclus: by the stroke
Of Phoebus vanquish’d, and Euphorbus’ spear:
But Hector, when Patroclus from the fight
He saw retreating, wounded, through the ranks
Advancing, smote him through the flank; right through
The brazen spear was driv’n; thund’ring he fell;
And deeply mourn’d his fall the Grecian host.

As when a lion hath in fight o’erborne
A tusked boar, when on the mountain top
They two have met, in all their pride of strength,
Both parch’d with thirst, around a scanty spring;
And vanquish’d by the lion’s force, the boar
Hath yielded, gasping; so Menoetius’ son,
Great deeds achiev’d, at length beneath the spear
Of noble Hector yielded up his life;
Who o’er the vanquish’d, thus exulting, spoke:
“Patroclus, but of late thou mad’st thy boast
To raze our city walls, and in your ships
To bear away to your far-distant land,
Their days of freedom lost, our Trojan dames:
Fool that thou wast! nor knew’st, in their defence,
That Hector’s flying coursers scour’d the plain;
From them, the bravest of the Trojans, I
Avert the day of doom; while on our shores
Thy flesh shall glut the carrion birds of Troy.
Poor wretch! though brave he be, yet Peleus’ son
Avail’d thee nought, when, hanging back himself,
With sage advice he sent thee forth to fight:
‘Come not to me, Patroclus, car-borne chief,
Nor to the ships return, until thou bear
The warrior-slayer Hector’s bloody spoils,
Torn from his body;’ such were, I suppose,
His counsels; thou, poor fool, becam’st his dupe.”
To whom Patroclus thus in accents faint:

“Hector, thou boastest loudly now, that Jove,
With Phoebus join’d, hath thee with vict’ry crown’d:
They wrought my death, who stripp’d me of my arms.
Had I to deal with twenty such as thee,
They all should perish, vanquish’d by my spear:
Me fate hath slain, and Phoebus; and, of men,
Euphorbus; thou wast but the third to strike.
This too I say, and bear it in thy mind;
Not long shalt thou survive me; death e’en now
And final doom hangs o’er thee, by the hand
Of great Achilles, Peleus’ matchless son.”

Thus as he spoke, the gloom of death his eyes
O’erspread, and to the shades his spirit fled,
Mourning his fate, his youth and strength cut off.
To whom, though dead, the noble Hector thus:
“Patroclus, why predict my coming fate?
Or who can say but fair-hair’d Thetis’ son,
Achilles, by my spear may first be slain?”

He said, and planting firm his foot, withdrew
The brazen spear, and backward drove the dead
From off the weapon’s point; then, spear in hand,
Intent to slay, Automedon pursued,
The godlike follower of Æacides:
But him in safety bore th’ immortal steeds,
The noble prize the Gods to Peleus gave.



ARGUMENT.

THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.—THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.


Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy;
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus
retires; but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This Glaucus
objects to Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had
won from Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till
Ajax rallies them: Æneas sustains the Trojans. Æneas and Hector
attempt the chariot of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The
horses of Achilles deplore the loss of Patroclus; Jupiter covers his
body with a thick darkness; the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion.
Menelaus sends Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclus’s
death: then returns to the fight, where, though attacked with the
utmost fury, he and Meriones, assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body
to the ships.

The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies
in the fields before Troy.

BOOK XVII.

Nor was Patroclus’ fall, by Trojans slain,
Of warlike Menelaus unobserv’d;
Forward he sprang, in dazzling arms array’d,
And round him mov’d, as round her new-dropp’d calf
Her first, a heifer moves with plaintive moan:
So round Patroclus Menelaus mov’d,
His shield’s broad orb and spear before him held,
To all who might oppose him threat’ning death.
Nor, on his side, was Panthous’ noble son
Unmindful of the slain; but, standing near,
The warlike Menelaus thus address’d:

“Illustrious son of Atreus, Heav’n-born chief,
Quit thou the dead; yield up the bloody spoils:
For, of the Trojans and their fam’d Allies,
Mine was the hand that in the stubborn fight
First struck Patroclus; leave me then to wear
Among the men of Troy my honours due,
Lest by my spear thou lose thy cherish’d life.”

To whom in anger Menelaus thus:
“O Father Jove, how ill this vaunting tone
Beseems this braggart! In their own esteem,
“With Panthous’ sons for courage none may vie;
Nor pard, nor lion, nor the forest boar,
Fiercest of beasts, and proudest of his strength.
Yet nought avail’d to Hyperenor’s might
His youthful vigour, when he held me cheap,
And my encounter dar’d; of all the Greeks
He deem’d my prowess least; yet he, I ween,
On his own feet return’d not, to rejoice
His tender wife’s and honour’d parents’ sight.
So shall thy pride be quell’d, if me thou dare
Encounter; but I warn thee, while ’tis time,
Ere ill betide thee, ’mid the gen’ral throng
That thou withdraw, nor stand to me oppos’d.
After th’ event may e’en a fool be wise.”
He spoke in vain; Euphorbus thus replied:

“Now, Heav’n-born Menelaus, shalt thou pay
The forfeit for my brother’s life, o’er whom,
Slain by thy hand, thou mak’st thy boasting speech.
Thou in the chambers of her new-found home
Hast made his bride a weeping widow; thou
Hast fill’d with bitt’rest grief his parents’ hearts:
Some solace might those hapless mourners find,
Could I thy head and armour in the hands
Of Panthous and of honour’d Phrontis place;
Nor uncontested shall the proof remain,
Nor long deferr’d, of vict’ry or defeat.”

He said, and struck the centre of the shield,
But broke not through; against the stubborn brass
The point was bent; then with a pray’r to Jove
The son of Atreus in his turn advanc’d;
And, backward as he stepp’d, below his throat
Took aim, and pressing hard with stalwart hand
Drove through the yielding neck the pond’rous spear:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.
Those locks, that with the Graces’ hair might vie,
Those tresses bright, with gold and silver bound,
Were dabbled all with blood. As when a man
Hath rear’d a fair and vig’rous olive plant,
In some lone spot, by copious-gushing springs,
And seen expanding, nurs’d by ev’ry breeze,
Its whit’ning blossoms; till with sudden gust
A sweeping hurricane of wind and rain
Uproots it from its bed, and prostrate lays;
So lay the youthful son of Panthous, slain
By Atreus’ son, and of his arms despoil’d.
And as a lion, in the mountains bred,
In pride of strength, amid the pasturing herd
Seizes a heifer in his pow’rful jaws,
The choicest; and, her neck first broken, rends,
And, on her entrails gorging, laps the blood;
Though with loud clamour dogs and herdsmen round
Assail him from afar, yet ventures none
To meet his rage, for fear is on them all;
So none was there so bold, with dauntless breast
The noble Menelaus’ wrath to meet.
Now had Atrides borne away with ease
The spoils of Panthous’ son; but Phoebus grudg’d
His prize of vict’ry, and against him launch’d
The might of Hector, terrible as Mars:
To whom his winged words, in Mentes’ form,
Chief of the Cicones, he thus address’d:

“Hector, thy labour all is vain, pursuing
Pelides’ flying steeds; and hard are they
For mortal man to harness, or control.
Save for Achilles’ self, the Goddess-born.
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Defends meanwhile Patroclus; and e’en now
Hath slain a noble Trojan, Panthous’ son,
Euphorbus, and his youthful vigour quell’d.”

He said, and join’d again the strife of men:
Hector’s dark soul with bitter grief was fill’d;
He look’d amid the ranks, and saw the two,
One slain, the other stripping off his arms,
The blood outpouring from the gaping wound.
Forward he sprang, in dazzling arms array’d,
Loud shouting, blazing like the quenchless flames
Of Vulcan: Menelaus heard the shout,
And, troubled, commun’d with his valiant heart:

“Oh, woe is me! for should I now the spoils
Abandon, and Patroclus, who for me
And in my cause lies slain, of any Greek
Who saw me, I might well incur the blame:
And yet if here alone I dare to fight
With Hector and his Trojans, much I fear,
Singly, to be by numbers overwhelm’d;
For Hector all the Trojans hither brings.
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Who strives, against the will divine, with one
Belov’d of Heav’n, a bitter doom must meet.
Then none may blame me, though I should retreat
From Hector, who with Heav’n’s assistance wars.
Yet could I hear brave Ajax’ battle cry,
We two, returning, would the encounter dare,
E’en against Heav’n, if so for Peleus’ son
We might regain, and bear away the dead:
Some solace of our loss might then be ours.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
By Hector led, the Trojan ranks advanc’d:
Backward he mov’d, abandoning the dead;
But turning oft, as when by men and dogs
A bearded lion from the fold is driv’n
With shouts and spears; yet grieves his mighty heart,
And with reluctant step he quits the yard:
So from Patroclus Menelaus mov’d;
Yet when he reach’d his comrades’ ranks, he turn’d,
And look’d around, if haply he might find
The mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.
Him on the battle’s farthest left he spied,
Cheering his friends and urging to the fight,
For sorely Phoebus had their courage tried;
And hast’ning to his side, address’d him thus:

“Ajax, haste hither; to the rescue come
Of slain Patroclus; if perchance we two
May to Achilles, Peleus’ son, restore
His body: his naked body, for his arms
Are prize to Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said, and Ajax’ spirit within him stirr’d;
Forward he sprang, and with him Atreus’ son.
Hector was dragging now Patroclus’ corpse,
Stripped of its glitt’ring armour, and intent
The head to sever with his sword, and give
The mangled carcase to the dogs of Troy:
But Ajax, with his tow’r-like shield, approach’d;
Then Hector to his comrades’ ranks withdrew,
Rush’d to his car, and bade the Trojans bear
The glitt’ring arms, his glorious prize, to Troy:
While Ajax with his mighty shield o’erspread
Menoetius’ son; and stood, as for his cubs
A lion stands, whom hunters, unaware,
Have with his offspring met amid the woods.
Proud in his strength he stands; and down are drawn,
Cov’ring his eyes, the wrinkles of his brow:
So o’er Patroclus mighty Ajax stood,
And by his side, his heart with grief oppress’d,
The warlike Menelaus, Atreus’ son.

Then Glaucus, leader of the Lycian host,
To Hector thus, with scornful glance, address’d
His keen reproaches: “Hector, fair of form,
How art thou wanting in the fight! thy fame,
Coward and runaway, thou hast belied.
Bethink thee now, if thou alone canst save
The city, aided but by Trojans born;
Henceforth no Lycian will go forth for Troy
To fight with Greeks; since favour none we gain
By unremitting toil against the foe.
How can a meaner man expect thine aid,
Who basely to the Greeks a prize and spoil
Sarpedon leav’st, thy comrade and thy guest?
Greatly he serv’d the city and thyself,
While yet he liv’d; and now thou dar’st not save
His body from the dogs! By my advice
If Lycians will be rul’d, we take at once
Our homeward way, and Troy may meet her doom.
But if in Trojan bosoms there abode
The daring, dauntless courage, meet for men
Who in their country’s cause against the foe
Endure both toil and war, we soon should see
Patroclus brought within the walls of Troy;
Him from the battle could we bear away,
And, lifeless, bring to royal Priam’s town,
Soon would the Greeks Sarpedon’s arms release,
And we to Ilium’s heights himself might bear:
For with his valiant comrades there lies slain
The follower of the bravest chief of Greece.
But thou before the mighty Ajax stood’st
With downcast eyes, nor durst in manly fight
Contend with one thy better far confess’d.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
With stern regard, replied: “Why, Glaucus, speak,
Brave as thou art, in this o’erbearing strain?
Good friend, I heretofore have held thee wise
O’er all who dwell in Lycia’s fertile soil;
But now I change, and hold thy judgment cheap,
Who chargest me with flying from the might
Of giant Ajax; never have I shrunk
From the stern fight, and clatter of the cars;
But all o’erruling is the mind of Jove,
Who strikes with panic, and of vict’ry robs
The bravest; and anon excites to war.
Stand by me now, and see if through the day
I prove myself the coward that thou say’st,
Or suffer that a Greek, how brave soe’er,
Shall rescue from my hands Patroclus’ corpse.”

He said, and loudly on the Trojans call’d:
“Trojans and Lycians, and ye Dardans, fam’d
In close encounter, quit ye now like men;
Maintain awhile the stubborn fight, while I
The splendid armour of Achilles don,
My glorious prize from slain Patroclus torn.”

So saying, Hector of the glancing helm,
Withdrawing from the field, with rapid steps
His comrades follow’d, and ere long o’ertook,
Who tow’rd the town Achilles’ armour bore;
Then standing from the bloody fight aloof
The armour he exchang’d; his own he bade
The warlike Trojans to the city bear;
While he, of Peleus’ son, Achilles, donn’d
The heav’nly armour, which th’ immortal Gods
Gave to his sire; he to his son convey’d;
Yet in that armour grew not old that son.

Him when apart the Cloud-compeller saw
Girt with the arms of Peleus’ godlike son,
He shook his head, and inly thus he mus’d:
“Ah hapless! little deem’st thou of thy fate,
Though now so nigh! Thou of the prime of men,
The dread of all, hast donn’d th’ immortal arms,
Whose comrade, brave and good, thy hand hath slain;
And sham’d him, stripping from his head and breast
Helmet and cuirass; yet thy latest hours
Will I with glory crown; since ne’er from thee,
Return’d from battle, shall Andromache
Receive the spoils of Peleus’ godlike son.”

He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows;
Then with the armour, fitted to his form
By Jove himself, was Hector girt by Mars
The fierce and terrible; with vig’rous strength
His limbs were strung, as ’mid his brave allies
He sprang, loud-shouting; glitt’ring in his arms,
To all he seem’d Achilles’ godlike self.
To each and all in cheering tones he spoke,
Mesthles and Glaucus and Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus and Hippothous,
Medon, Deisenor, Phoreys, Chromius,
And Ennomus the seer: to all of these
His winged words he cheeringly address’d:

“Hear me, ye countless tribes, that dwelling round
Assist our cause! You from your sev’ral homes
Not for display of numbers have I call’d,
But that with willing hearts ye should defend
Our wives and infants from the warlike Greeks:
For this I drain my people’s stores, for food
And gifts for you, exalting your estate;
Then, who will boldly onward, he may fall,
Or safe escape, such is the chance of war;
But who within our valiant Trojans’ ranks
Shall but the body of Patroclus bring,
Despite the might of Ajax; half the spoils
To him I give, the other half myself
Retaining; and his praise shall equal mine.”

He said; and onward, with uplifted spears,
They march’d upon the Greeks; high rose their hopes
From Ajax Telamon to snatch the dead;
Vain hopes, which cost them many a life! Then thus
To valiant Menelaus Ajax spoke;

“O Heav’n-born Menelaus, noble friend,
For safe return I dare no longer hope:
Not for Patroclus’ corpse so much I fear,
Which soon will glut the dogs and birds of Troy,
As for my life and thine I tremble now:
For, like a war-cloud, Hector’s might I see
O’ershadowing all around; now is our doom
Apparent; but do thou for succour call
On all the chiefs, if haply they may hear.”
Thus Ajax spoke: obedient to his word,
On all the chiefs Atrides call’d aloud:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
All ye that banquet at the gen’ral cost
With Atreus’ sons, and o’er your sev’ral states
Dominion hold; whose honour is of Jove;
’Twere hard to call by name each single man,
So fierce the combat rages; but let each
And all their aid afford, and deem, it shame
Patroclus’ corpse should glut the dogs of Troy.”

He said: first heard Oileus’ active son,
And hast’ning through the fray, beside him stood.
Next him Idomeneus, with whom there came,
Valiant as Mars, his friend Meriones.
But who can know or tell the names of all,
Who, following, swell’d the battle of the Greeks?
Onward the Trojans press’d, by Hector led:
With such a sound, as when the ocean wave
Meets on the beach th’ outpouring of a stream,
Swoll’n by the rains of Heav’n: the lofty cliffs
Resound, and bellows the big sea without;
With such a sound advanc’d the Trojan host:
While round Patroclus, with one heart and mind,
The Greeks a fence of brass-clad bucklers rais’d.
O’er their bright helms the son of Saturn shed
A veil of darkness; for Menoetius’ son,
Achilles’ faithful friend, while yet he liv’d
Jove hated not, nor would that now his corpse
Should to the dogs of Troy remain a prey,
But to the rescue all his comrades stirr’d.
At first the Trojans drove the keen-ey’d Greeks;
Leaving the corpse, they fled; nor with their spears
The valiant Trojans reach’d a single Greek;
But on the dead they seiz’d; yet not for long
Endur’d their flight; them Ajax rallied soon,
In form pre-eminent, and deeds of arms,
O’er all the Greeks, save Peleus’ matchless son.
Onward he sprang, as springs a mountain boar,
Which, turning in the forest glade to bay,
Scatters with ease both dogs and stalwart youths;
So Ajax scatter’d soon the Trojan ranks,
That round Patroclus closing, hop’d to bear,
With glory to themselves, his corpse to Troy.
Hippothous, Pelasgian Lethus’ son,
Was dragging by the feet the noble dead,
A leathern belt around his ancles bound,
Seeking the favour of the men of Troy;
But on himself he brought destruction down,
Which none might turn aside; for from the crowd
Outsprang the son of Telamon, and struck,
In close encounter, on the brass-cheek’d helm;
The plumed helm was shiver’d by the blow,
Dealt by a weighty spear and stalwart hand;
Gush’d from the wound the mingled blood and brain,
His vital spirit quench’d; and on the ground
Fell from his pow’rless grasp Patroclus’ foot;
While he himself lay stretch’d beside the dead,
Far from his own Larissa’s teeming soil:
Not destin’d he his parents to repay
Their early care; for short his term of life,
By godlike Ajax’ mighty spear subdu’d.

At Ajax Hector threw his glitt’ring spear:
He saw, and narrowly the brazen death
Escap’d; but Schedius, son of Iphitus,
(The bravest of the Phocian chiefs, who dwelt
In far-fam’d Panopeus, the mighty Lord
Of num’rous hosts,) below the collar-bone
It struck, and passing through, the brazen point
Came forth again beneath his shoulder-blade:
Thund’ring he fell, and loud his armour rang.

As Phorcys, son of Phaenops, kept his watch
O’er slain Hippothous, him Ajax smote
Below the waist; the weighty spear broke through
The hollow breastplate, and th’ intestines tore;
Prone in the dust he fell, and clutch’d the ground.
At this the Trojan chiefs and Hector’s self
’Gan to give way; the Greeks, with joyful shouts,
Seiz’d both the dead, and stripp’d their armour off.
To Ilium now, before the warlike Greeks,
O’ercome by panic, had the Trojans fled;
And now had Greeks, despite the will of Jove,
By their own strength and courage, won the day,
Had not Apollo’s self Æneas rous’d,
In likeness of a herald, Periphas,
The son of Epytus, now aged grown
In service of Æneas’ aged sire,
A man of kindliest soul: his form assum’d
Apollo, and Æneas thus address’d:

“Æneas, how, against the will of Heav’n,
Could ye defend your city, as others now
In their own strength and courage confident,
Their numbers, and their troops’ undaunted hearts,
I see their cause maintaining; if when Jove
Rather to us than them the vict’ry wills,
With fear unspeakable ye shun the fight?”

He said: the presence of the Archer-God
Æneas knew, and loud to Hector call’d:
“Hector, and all ye other chiefs of Troy,
And brave Allies, foul shame it were that we,
O’ercome by panic, should to Ilium now
In flight be driv’n before the warlike Greeks;
And by my side, but now, some God there stood,
And told how Jove, the sov’reign arbiter
Of battle, on our side bestow’d his aid;
On then! nor undisturbed allow the Greeks
To bear Patroclus’ body to their ships.”

He said, and far before the ranks advanc’d;
They rallying turn’d, and fac’d again the Greeks.
Then first Æneas’ spear the comrade brave
Of Lycomedes struck, Laocritus,
Son of Arisbas; Lycomedes saw
With pitying eyes his gallant comrade’s fall;
And standing near, his glitt’ring spear he threw,
And through the midriff Apisaon struck,
His people’s guardian chief, the valiant son
Of Hippasus, and slack’d his limbs in death.
He from Paeonia’s fertile fields had come,
O’er all his comrades eminent in fight,
All save Asteropaeus, who with eyes
Of pity saw his gallant comrade’s fall,
And forward sprang to battle with the Greeks;
Yet could not force his way; for all around
Patroclus rose a fence of serried shields,
And spears projecting: such the orders giv’n
By Ajax, and with earnest care enforc’d;
That from around the dead should none retire,
Nor any to the front advance alone
Before his fellows; but their steady guard
Maintain, and hand to hand the battle wage.
So order’d Ajax; then with crimson blood
The earth was wet; and hand to hand they fell,
Trojans alike, and brave Allies, and Greeks;
For neither these a bloodless fight sustain’d,
Though fewer far their losses; for they stood
Of mutual succour mindful, and support.
Thus, furious as the rage of fire, they fought;
Nor might ye deem the glorious sun himself
Nor moon was safe; for darkest clouds of night
O’erspread the warriors, who the battle wag’d
Around the body of Menoetius’ son:
Elsewhere the Trojans and the well-greav’d Greeks
Fought, undisturb’d, in the clear light of day;
The sun’s bright beams were shed abroad; no cloud
Lay on the face of earth or mountain tops;
They but by fits, at distant intervals,
And far apart, each seeking to avoid
The hostile missiles, fought; but in the midst
The bravest all, in darkness and in strife
Sore press’d, toil’d on beneath their armour’s weight.

As yet no tidings of Patroclus’ fall
Had reach’d two valiant chiefs, Antilochus
And Thrasymedes; but they deem’d him still
Alive, and fighting in the foremost ranks.
They, witnessing their comrades’ flight and death,
Fought on apart, by Nestor so enjoin’d,
When from the ships he bade them join the fray.
Great was meanwhile their labour, who sustain’d,
Throughout the livelong day, that weary fight;
Reek’d with continuous toil and sweat, the knees,
And legs and feet, the arms, and eyes, of all
Who round Achilles’ faithful comrade fought.
As when a chief his people bids to stretch
A huge bull’s hide, all drench’d and soak’d with grease;
They in a circle rang’d, this way and that,
Pull the tough hide, till ent’ring in, the grease
Is all absorb’d; and dragg’d by num’rous hands
The supple skin to th’ utmost length is stretch’d;
So these in narrow space this way and that
The body dragg’d; and high the hopes of each
To bear it off in triumph; to their ships
The Greeks, to Troy the Trojans; fiercely rag’d
The struggle; spirit-stirring Mars himself,
Or Pallas to her utmost fury rous’d,
Had not that struggle with contempt beheld:
Such grievous labour o’er Patroclus’ corpse
Had Jove to horses and to men decreed.

But of Patroclus’ fall no tidings yet
Had reach’d Achilles; for the war was wag’d
Far from the ships, beneath the walls of Troy;
Nor look’d he of his death to hear, but deem’d
That when the Trojans to their gates were driv’n,
He would return in safety; for no hope
Had he of taking by assault the town,
With, or without, his aid; for oft apart
His Goddess-mother had his doom, foretold,
Revealing to her son the mind of Jove;
Yet ne’er had warn’d him of such grief as this,
Which now befell, his dearest comrade’s loss.

Still round the dead they held their pointed spears,
Fought hand to hand, and mutual slaughter dealt;
And thus perchance some brass-clad Greek would say:

“O friends, ’twere shameful should we to the ships
Ingloriously return; ere that should be,
Let earth engulph us all; so better far
Than let these Trojans to their city bear
Our dead, and boast them of their triumph gain’d.”
On th’ other hand some valiant Trojan thus
Would shout: “O friends, tho’ fate decreed that here
We all should die, yet let not one give way.”

Thus, cheering each his comrades, would they speak,
And thus they fought; the iron clangour pierc’d
The empty air, and brazen vault of Heav’n.
But, from the fight withdrawn, Achilles’ steeds
Wept, as they heard how in the dust was laid
Their charioteer, by Hector’s murd’rous hand.
Automedon, Diores’ valiant son,
Essay’d in vain to rouse them with the lash,
In vain with honey’d words, in vain with threats;
Nor to the ships would they return again
By the broad Hellespont, nor join the fray;
But as a column stands, which marks the tomb
Of man or woman, so immovable
Beneath the splendid car they stood, their heads
Down-drooping to the ground, while scalding tears
Dropp’d earthward from their eyelids, as they mourn’d
Their charioteer; and o’er the yoke-band shed
Down stream’d their ample manes, with dust defil’d.
The son of Saturn pitying saw their grief,
And sorrowing shook his head, as thus he mus’d:

“Ah, hapless horses! wherefore gave we you
To royal Peleus, to a mortal man,
You that from age and death are both exempt!
Was it that you the miseries might share
Of wretched mortals? for of all that breathe,
And walk upon the earth, or creep, is nought
More wretched than th’ unhappy race of man.
Yet shall not ye, nor shall your well-wrought car,
By Hector, son of Priam, be controll’d;
I will not suffer it; enough for him
To hold, with vaunting boast, Achilles’ arms;
But to your limbs and spirits will I impart
Such strength, that from the battle to the ships
Ye shall in safety bear Automedon;
For yet I will the Trojans shall prevail,
And slay, until they reach the well-mann’d ships,
Till sets the sun, and darkness shrouds the earth.”

He said, and in their breasts fresh spirit infus’d;
They, shaking from their manes the dust, the car
Amid the Greeks and Trojans lightly bore.
Then, as a vulture ’mid a flock of geese,
Amid the battle rush’d Automedon,
His horses’ course directing, and their speed
Exciting, though he mourn’d his comrade slain.
Swiftly he fled from out the Trojan host;
Swiftly again assail’d them in pursuit;
Yet, speedy to pursue, he could not slay;
Nor, in the car alone, had pow’r at once
To guide the flying steeds, and hurl the spear.
At length a comrade brave, Alcimedon,
Laerces’ son, beheld; behind the car
He stood, and thus Automedon address’d:
“Automedon, what God has fill’d thy mind
With counsels vain, and thee of sense bereft?
That with the Trojans, in the foremost ranks,
Thou fain wouldst fight alone, thy comrade slain,
While Hector proudly on his breast displays
The glorious arms of great Æacides.”

To whom Automedon, Diores’ son:
“Alcimedon, since none of all the Greeks
May vie with thee, the mettle to control
Of these immortal horses, save indeed,
While yet he liv’d, Patroclus, godlike chief;
But him stern death and fate have overta’en;
Take thou the whip and shining reins, while I,
Descending from the car, engage in fight.”

He said; and, mounting on the war-car straight,
Alcimedon the whip and reins assum’d;
Down leap’d Automedon; great Hector saw,
And thus address’d Æneas at his side:

“Æneas, prince and counsellor of Troy,
I see, committed to unskilful hands,
Achilles’ horses on the battle-field:
These we may hope to take, if such thy will;
For they, methinks, will scarcely stand oppos’d,
Or dare th’ encounter of our joint assault.”

He said; Anchises’ valiant son complied;
Forward they went, their shoulders cover’d o’er
With stout bull’s-hide, thick overlaid with brass.
With them both Chromius and Aretus went;

And high their hopes were rais’d, the warriors both
To slay, and make the strong-neck’d steeds their prize:
Blind fools! nor destin’d scatheless to escape
Automedon’s encounter; he his pray’r
To Jove address’d, and straight with added strength
His soul was fill’d; and to Alcimedon,
His trusty friend and comrade, thus he spoke:

“Alcimedon, do thou the horses keep
Not far away, but breathing on my neck;
For Hector’s might will not, I deem, be stay’d,
Ere us he slay, and mount Achilles’ car,
And carry terror ’mid the Grecian host,
Or in the foremost ranks himself be slain.”

Thus spoke Automedon, and loudly call’d
On Menelaus and th’ Ajaces both:
“Ye two Ajaces, leaders of the host,
And, Menelaus, with our bravest all,
Ye on the dead alone your care bestow,
To guard him, and stave off the hostile ranks;
But haste, and us, the living, save from death;
For Hector and Æneas hitherward,
With weight o’erpow’ring, through the bloody press,
The bravest of the Trojans, force their way:
Yet is the issue in the hands of Heav’n;
I hurl the spear, but Jove directs the blow.”

He said, and, poising, hurl’d the pond’rous spear;
Full on Aretus’ broad-orb’d shield it struck;
Nor stay’d the shield its course; the brazen point
Drove through the belt, and in his body lodg’d.
As with sharp axe in hand a stalwart man,
Striking behind the horns a sturdy bull,
Severs the neck; he, forward, plunging, falls;
So forward first he sprang, then backwards fell:
And quiv’ring, in his vitals deep infix’d,
The sharp spear soon relax’d his limbs in death.
Then at Automedon great Hector threw
His glitt’ring spear; he saw, and forward stoop’d,
And shunn’d the brazen death; behind him far
Deep in the soil infix’d, with quiv’ring shaft
The weapon stood; there Mars its impulse stay’d.
And now with swords, and hand to hand, the fight
Had been renew’d; but at their comrade’s call
The two Ajaces, pressing through the throng,
Between the warriors interpos’d in haste.
Before them Hector and Æneas both,
And godlike Chromius, in alarm recoil’d;
Pierc’d through the heart, Aretus there they left;
And, terrible as Mars, Automedon
Stripp’d off his arms, and thus exulting cried:
“Of some small portion of its load of grief,
For slain Patroclus, is my heart reliev’d,
In slaying thee, all worthless as thou art.”

Then, throwing on the car the bloody spoils,
He mounted, hands and feet imbrued with blood,
As ’twere a lion, fresh from his repast
Upon the carcase of a slaughter’d bull.

Again around Patroclus’ body rag’d
The stubborn conflict, direful, sorrow-fraught:
From Heav’n descending, Pallas stirr’d the strife,
Sent by all-seeing Jove to stimulate
The warlike Greeks; so changed was now his will.
As o’er the face of Heav’n when Jove extends
His bright-hued bow, a sign to mortal men
Of war, or wintry storms, which bid surcease
The rural works of man, and pinch the flocks;
So Pallas, in a bright-hued cloud array’d,
Pass’d through the ranks, and rous’d each sev’ral man.
To noble Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Who close beside her stood, the Goddess first,
The form of Phoenix and his pow’rful voice
Assuming, thus her stirring words address’d:

“On thee, O Menelaus, foul reproach
Will fasten, if Achilles’ faithful friend
The dogs devour beneath the walls of Troy;
Then hold thou firm, and all the host inspire.”

To whom thus Menelaus, good in fight:
“O Phoenix, aged warrior, honour’d sire,
If Pallas would the needful pow’r impart,
And o’er me spread her aegis, then would I
Undaunted for Patroclus’ rescue fight,
For deeply by his death my heart is touch’d;
But valiant Hector, with the strength of fire
Still rages, and destruction deals around:
For Jove is with him, and his triumph wills.”

He said: the blue-ey’d Goddess heard with joy
That, chief of all the Gods, her aid he sought.
She gave fresh vigour to his arms and knees,
And to his breast the boldness of the fly,
Which, oft repell’d by man, renews th’ assault
Incessant, lur’d by taste of human blood;
Such boldness in Atrides’ manly breast
Pallas inspir’d: beside Patroclus’ corpse
Again he stood, and pois’d his glitt’ring spear.

There was one Podes in the Trojan ranks,
Son of Eetion, rich, of blameless life,
Of all the people most to Hector dear,
And at his table oft a welcome guest:
Him, as he turn’d to fly, beneath the waist
Atrides struck; right through the spear was driv’n;
Thund’ring he fell; and Atreus’ son the corpse
Dragg’d from the Trojans ’mid the ranks of Greece.

Then close at Hector’s side Apollo stood,
Clad in the form of Phaenops, Asius’ son,
Who in Abydos dwelt; of all th’ Allies
Honour’d of Hector most, and best belov’d;
Clad in his form, the Far-destroyer spoke:

“Hector, what other Greek will scare thee next?
Who shrink’st from Menelaus, heretofore
A warrior deem’d of no repute; but now,
Alone, he robs our Trojans of their dead;
And in the foremost ranks e’en now hath slain
Podes, thine own good friend, Eetion’s son.”

He said; dark grief o’erclouded Hector’s brow,
As to the front in dazzling arms he sprang.
Then Saturn’s son his tassell’d aegis wav’d,
All glitt’ring bright; and Ida’s lofty head
In clouds and darkness shrouded; then he bade
His lightning flash, his volleying thunder roar,
That shook the mountain; and with vict’ry crown’d
The Trojan arms, and panic-struck the Greeks.

The first who turn’d to fly was Peneleus,
Bœotian chief; him, facing still the foe,
A spear had slightly on the shoulder struck,
The bone just grazing: by Polydamas,
Who close before him stood, the spear was thrown.
Then Hector Leitus, Aloctryon’s son,
Thrust thro’ the wrist, and quell’d his warlike might;
Trembling, he look’d around, nor hop’d again
The Trojans, spear in hand, to meet in fight;
But, onward as he rush’d on Leitus,
Idomeneus at Hector threw his spear:
Full on his breast it struck; but near the head
The sturdy shaft was on the breastplate snapp’d:
Loud was the Trojans’ shout; and he in turn
Aim’d at Idomeneus, Deucalion’s son,
Upstanding on his car; his mark he miss’d,
But Coeranus he struck, the charioteer
And faithful follower of Meriones,
Who with him came from Lyctus’ thriving town:
The chief had left on foot the well-trimm’d ships;
And, had not Coeranus his car in haste
Driv’n to the rescue, by his fall had giv’n
A Trojan triumph; to his Lord he brought
Safety, and rescue from unsparing death;
But fell, himself, by Hector’s murd’rous hand.
Him Hector struck between the cheek and ear,
Crashing the teeth, and cutting through the tongue.
Headlong he fell to earth, and dropp’d the reins:
These, stooping from the car, Meriones
Caught up, and thus Idomeneus address’d:

“Ply now the lash, until thou reach the ships:
Thyself must see how crush’d the strength of Greece.”

He said; and tow’rd the ships Idomeneus
Urg’d his fleet steeds; for fear was on his soul.
Nor did not Ajax and Atrides see
How in the Trojans’ favour Saturn’s son
The wav’ring scale of vict’ry turn’d; and thus
Great Ajax Telamon his grief express’d:

“O Heav’n! the veriest child might plainly see
That Jove the Trojans’ triumph has decreed:
Their weapons all, by whomsoever thrown,
Or weak, or strong, attain their mark; for Jove
Directs their course; while ours upon the plain
Innocuous fall. But take we counsel now
How from the fray to bear away our dead,
And by our own return rejoice those friends
Who look with sorrow on our plight, and deem
That we, all pow’rless to resist the might
Of Hector’s arm, beside the ships must fall.
Would that some comrade were at hand, to bear
A message to Achilles; him, I ween,
As yet the mournful tidings have not reach’d,
That on the field his dearest friend lies dead.
But such I see not; for a veil of cloud
O’er men and horses all around is spread.
O Father Jove, from, o’er the sons of Greece
Remove this cloudy darkness; clear the sky,
That we may see our fate, and die at least,
If such thy will, in th’ open light of day.”

He said, and, pitying, Jove beheld his tears;
The clouds he scatter’d, and the mist dispers’d;
The sun shone forth, and all the field was clear;
Then Ajax thus to Menelaus spoke:

“Now, Heav’n-born Menelaus, look around
If haply ’mid the living thou mayst see
Antilochus, the noble Nestor’s son;
And bid him to Achilles bear in haste
The tidings, that his dearest friend lies dead.”

He said, nor did Atrides not comply;
But slow as moves a lion from the fold,
Which dogs and youths with ceaseless toil hath worn,
Who all night long have kept their watch, to guard
From his assault the choicest of the herd;
He, hunger-pinch’d, hath oft th’ attempt renew’d,
But nought prevail’d; by spears on ev’ry side,
And jav’lins met, wielded by stalwart hands,
And blazing torches, which his courage daunt;
Till with the morn he sullenly withdraws;
So from Patroclus, with reluctant step
Atrides mov’d; for much he fear’d the Greeks
Might to the Trojans, panic-struck, the dead
Abandon; and departing, he besought
The two Ajaces and Meriones:
“Ye two Ajaces, leaders of the Greeks,
And thou, Meriones, remember now
Our lost Patroclus’ gentle courtesy,
How kind and genial was his soul to all,
While yet he liv’d—now sunk, alas! in death.”

Thus saying, Menelaus took his way,
Casting his glance around on ev’ry side,
Like to an eagle, fam’d of sharpest sight
Of all that fly beneath the vault of Heav’n;
Whom, soaring in the clouds, the crouching hare
Eludes not, though in leafiest covert hid;
But swooping down, he rends her life away:
So, Menelaus, through the ranks of war
Thy piercing glances ev’ry way were turn’d,
If Nestor’s son, alive, thou mightst descry;
Him on the field’s extremest left he found,
Cheering his friends, and urging to the fight;
He stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Antilochus, come hither, godlike friend,
And woful tidings hear, which would to Heav’n
I had not to impart; thyself thou seest
How Jove hath heap’d disaster on the Greeks,
And vict’ry giv’n to Troy; but one has fallen,
Our bravest, best! Patroclus lies in death;
And deeply must the Greeks his loss deplore.
But haste thee to the ships, to Peleus’ son
The tidings bear, if haply he may save
The body of Patroclus from the foe;
His naked body, for his arms are now
The prize of Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said; and at his words Antilochus
Astounded stood; long time his tongue in vain
For utt’rance strove; his eyes were fill’d with tears,
His cheerful voice was mute; yet not the less
To Menelaus’ bidding gave his care:
Swiftly he sped; but to Laodocus,
His comrade brave, who waited with his car
In close attendance, first consign’d his arms;
Then from the field with active limbs he flew,
Weeping, with mournful news, to Peleus’ son.
Nor, noble Menelaus, did thy heart
Incline thee to remain, and aid thy friends,
Where from their war-worn ranks the Pylian troops
Deplor’d the absence of Antilochus;
But these in godlike Thrasymedes’ charge
He left; and to Patroclus hast’ning back,
Beside th’ Ajaces stood, as thus he spoke:
“Him to Achilles, to the ships, in haste
I have despatch’d; yet fiercely as his wrath
May burn tow’rd Hector, I can scarce expect
His presence here; for how could he, unarm’d,
With Trojans fight? But take we counsel now
How from the field to bear away our dead,
And ’scape ourselves from death by Trojan hands.”

Whom answer’d thus great Ajax Telamon:
“Illustrious Menelaus, all thy words
Are just and true; then from amid the press,
Thou and Meriones, take up in haste,
And bear away the body; while behind
We two, in heart united, as in name,
Who side by side have still been wont to fight,
Will Hector and his Trojans hold at bay.”

He said; they, lifting in their arms the corpse,
Uprais’d it high in air; then from behind
Loud yell’d the Trojans, as they saw the Greeks
Retiring with their dead; and on they rush’d,
As dogs that in advance of hunter youths
Pursue a wounded boar; awhile they run,
Eager for blood; but when, in pride of strength,
He turns upon them, backward they recoil,
This way and that in fear of death dispers’d:
So onward press’d awhile the Trojan crowd,
With thrust of swords, and double-pointed spears;
But ever as th’ Ajaces turn’d to bay,
Their colour chang’d to pale, not one so bold
As, dashing on, to battle for the corpse.
Thus they, with anxious care, from off the field
Bore tow’rd the ships their dead; but on their track
Came sweeping on the storm of battle, fierce,
As, on a sudden breaking forth, the fire
Seizes some populous city, and devours
House after house amid the glare and blaze,
While roar the flames before the gusty wind;
So fiercely pressed upon the Greeks’ retreat
The clatt’ring tramp of steeds and armed men.
But as the mules, with stubborn strength endued,
That down the mountain through the trackless waste
Drag some huge log, or timber for the ships;
And spent with toil and sweat, still labour on
Unflinching; so the Greeks with patient toil
Bore on their dead; th’ Ajaces in their rear
Stemming the war, as stems the torrent’s force
Some wooded cliff, far stretching o’er the plain;
Checking the mighty river’s rushing stream,
And flinging it aside upon the plain,
Itself unbroken by the strength of flood:
So firmly, in the rear, th’ Ajaces stemm’d
The Trojan force; yet these still onward press’d,
And, ’mid their comrades proudly eminent,
Two chiefs, Æneas, old Anchises’ son,
And glorious Hector, in the van were seen.
Then, as a cloud of starlings or of daws
Fly screaming, as they see the hawk approach,
To lesser birds the messenger of death;
So before Hector and Æneas fled,
Screaming, forgetful of their warlike fame,
The sons of Greece; and scatter’d here and there
Around the ditch lay store of goodly arms,
By Greeks abandon’d in their hasty flight.
Yet still, unintermitted, rag’d the war.



ARGUMENT.

THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN.


The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by
Antilochus. Thetis hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea-
nymphs to comfort him. The speeches of the mother and son on this
occasion. Iris appears to Achilles by command of Juno, and orders him
to show himself at the head of the intrenchments. The sight of him
turns the fortune of the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off
by the Greeks. The Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas
disagree in their opinions; but the advice of the former prevails, to
remain encamped in the field. The grief of Achilles over the body of
Patroclus.

Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan, to obtain new arms for her son.
The description of the wonderful works of Vulcan; and, lastly, that
noble one of the shield of Achilles.

The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night ensuing,
take up this book. The scene is at Achilles’ tent on the seashore, from
whence it changes to the palace of Vulcan.

BOOK XVIII.

Thus, furious as the rage of fire, they fought.
Meantime Antilochus to Peleus’ son,
Swift-footed messenger, his tidings bore.
Him by the high-beak’d ships he found, his mind
Th’ event presaging, fill’d with anxious thoughts,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“Alas! what means it, that the long-hair’d Greeks,
Chas’d from the plain, are thronging round the ships?
Let me not now, ye Gods, endure the grief
My mother once foretold, that I should live
To see the bravest of the Myrmidons
Cut off by Trojans from the light of day.
Menoetius’ noble son has surely fall’n;
Foolhardy! yet I warn’d him, and besought,
Soon as the ships from hostile fires were safe,
Back to return, nor Hector’s onset meet.”

While in his mind and spirit thus he mus’d,
Beside him stood the noble Nestor’s son,
And weeping, thus his mournful message gave:

“Alas! great son of Peleus, woful news,
Which would to Heav’n I had not to impart,
To thee I bring; Patroclus lies in death;
And o’er his body now the war is wag’d;
His naked body, for his arms are now
The prize of Hector of the glancing helm.”

He said; and darkest clouds of grief o’erspread
Achilles’ brow; with both his hands he seiz’d
And pour’d upon his head the grimy dust,
Marring his graceful visage; and defil’d
With black’ning ashes all his costly robes.
Stretch’d in the dust his lofty stature lay,
As with his hands his flowing locks he tore;
Loud was the wailing of the female band,
Achilles’ and Patroclus’ prize of war,
As round Achilles, rushing out of doors,
Beating their breasts, with tott’ring limbs they press’d.
In tears beside him stood Antilochus,
And in his own Achilles’ hand he held,
Groaning in spirit, fearful lest for grief
In his own bosom he should sheathe his sword.
Loud were his moans; his Goddess-mother heard,
Beside her aged father where she sat
In the deep ocean caves; she heard, and wept:
The Nereids all, in ocean’s depths who dwell,
Encircled her around; Cymodoce,[5]
Nesaee, Spio, and Cymothoe,
The stag-ey’d Halia, and Amphithoe,
Actaea, Limnorea, Melite,
Doris, and Galatea, Panope;
There too were Oreithyia, Clymene,
And Amathea with the golden hair,
And all the denizens of ocean’s depths.
Fill’d was the glassy cave; in unison
They beat their breasts, as Thetis led the wail:

“Give ear, my sister Nereids all, and learn
How deep the grief that in my breast I bear.
Me miserable! me, of noblest son
Unhappiest mother! me, a son who bore,
My brave, my beautiful, of heroes chief!
Like a young tree he throve: I tended him,
In a rich vineyard as the choicest plant;
Till in the beaked ships I sent him forth
To war with Troy; him ne’er shall I behold,
Returning home, in aged Peleus’ house.
E’en while he lives, and sees the light of day,
He lives in sorrow; nor, to soothe his grief,
My presence can avail; yet will I go,
That I may see my dearest child, and learn
What grief hath reach’d him, from the war withdrawn.”

She said, and left the cave; with her they went,
Weeping; before them parted th’ ocean wave.
But when they reach’d the fertile shore of Troy,
In order due they landed on the beach,
Where frequent, round Achilles swift of foot,
Were moor’d the vessels of the Myrmidons.
There, as he groan’d aloud, beside him stood
His Goddess-mother; weeping, in her hands
She held his head, while pitying thus she spoke:

“Why weeps my son? and what his cause of grief?
Speak out, and nought conceal; for all thy pray’r
Which with uplifted hands thou mad’st to Jove,
He hath fulfill’d, that, flying to their ships,
The routed sons of Greece should feel how much
They need thine aid, and mourn their insult past.”

To whom Achilles, deeply groaning, thus:
“Mother, all this indeed hath Jove fulfill’d;
Yet what avails it, since my dearest friend
Is slain, Patroclus? whom I honour’d most
Of all my comrades, lov’d him as my soul.
Him have I lost: and Hector from his corpse
Hath stripp’d those arms, those weighty, beauteous arms,
A marvel to behold, which from the Gods
Peleus receiv’d, a glorious gift, that day
When they consign’d thee to a mortal’s bed.
How better were it, if thy lot had been
Still ’mid the Ocean deities to dwell,
And Peleus had espous’d a mortal bride!
For now is bitter grief for thee in store,
Mourning thy son; whom to his home return’d
Thou never more shalt see; nor would I wish
To live, and move amid my fellow-men,
Unless that Hector, vanquish’d by my spear,
May lose his forfeit life, and pay the price
Of foul dishonour to Patroclus done.”

To whom, her tears o’erflowing, Thetis thus:
“E’en as thou sayst, my son, thy term is short;
Nor long shall Hector’s fate precede thine own.”

Achilles, answ’ring, spoke in passionate grief:
“Would I might die this hour, who fail’d to save
My comrade slain! far from his native land
He died, sore needing my protecting arm;
And I, who ne’er again must see my home,
Nor to Patroclus, nor the many Greeks
Whom Hector’s hand hath slain, have render’d aid;
But idly here I sit, cumb’ring the ground:
I, who amid the Greeks no equal own
In fight; to others, in debate, I yield.
Accurs’d of Gods and men be hateful strife
And anger, which to violence provokes
E’en temp’rate souls: though sweeter be its taste
Than dropping honey, in the heart of man
Swelling, like smoke; such anger in my soul
Hath Agamemnon kindled, King of men.
But pass we that; though still my heart be sore,
Yet will I school my angry spirit down.
In search of Hector now, of him who slew
My friend, I go; prepar’d to meet my death,
When Jove shall will it, and th’ Immortals all.
From death not e’en the might of Hercules,
Though best belov’d of Saturn’s son, could fly,
By fate and Juno’s bitter wrath subdued.
I too, since such my doom, must lie in death;
Yet, ere I die, immortal fame will win;
And from their delicate cheeks, deep-bosom’d dames,
Dardan and Trojan, bitter tears shall wipe,
And groan in anguish; then shall all men know
How long I have been absent from the field;
Then, though thou love me, seek not from the war
To stay my steps; for bootless were thy speech.”

Whom answer’d thus the silver-footed Queen:
“True are thy words, my son; and good it is,
And commendable, from the stroke of death
To save a worsted comrade; but thine arms,
Thy brazen, flashing arms, the Trojans hold:
Them Hector of the glancing helm himself
Bears on his breast, exulting; yet not long
Shall be his triumph, for his doom is nigh.
But thou, engage not in the toils of war,
Until thine eyes again behold me here;
For with to-morrow’s sun will I return
With arms of heav’nly mould, by Vulcan wrought.”

Thus saying, from her son she turn’d away,
And turning, to her sister Nereids spoke:
“Back to the spacious bosom of the deep
Retire ye now; and to my father’s house,
The aged Ocean God, your tidings bear;
While I to high Olympus speed, to crave
At Vulcan’s hand, the skill’d artificer,
A boon of dazzling armour for my son.”

She said; and they beneath the ocean wave
Descended, while to high Olympus sped
The silver-footed Goddess, thence in hope
To bear the dazzling armour to her son.
She to Olympus sped; the Greeks meanwhile
Before the warrior-slayer Hector fled
With wild, tumultuous uproar, till they reach’d
Their vessels and the shore of Hellespont.
Nor had the well-greav’d Greeks Achilles’ friend,
Patroclus, from amid the fray withdrawn;
For close upon him follow’d horse and man,
And Hector, son of Priam, fierce as flame;
Thrice noble Hector, seizing from behind,
Sought by the feet to drag away the dead,
Cheering his friends; thrice, clad in warlike might,
The two Ajaces drove him from his prey.
Yet, fearless in his strength, now rushing on
He dash’d amid the fray; now, shouting loud,
Stood firm; but backward not a step retir’d.
As from a carcase herdsmen strive in vain
To scare a tawny lion, hunger-pinch’d;
E’en so th’ Ajaces, mail-clad warriors, fail’d
The son of Priam from the corpse to scare.
And now the body had he borne away,
With endless fame; but from Olympus’ height
Came storm-swift Iris down to Peleus’ son,
And bade him don his arms; by Juno sent,
Unknown to Jove, and to th’ Immortals all.
She stood beside him, and address’d him thus:

“Up, son of Peleus! up, thou prince of men!
Haste to Patroclus’ rescue; whom, around,
Before the ships, is wag’d a fearful war,
With mutual slaughter; these the dead defending,
And those to Ilium’s breezy heights intent
To bear the body; noble Hector chief,
Who longs to sever from the tender neck,
And fix upon the spikes, thy comrade’s head.
Up then! delay no longer; deem it shame
Patroclus’ corpse should glut the dogs of Troy,
Dishon’ring thee, if aught dishonour him.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Say, heav’nly Iris, of th’ immortal Gods
Who bade thee seek me, and this message bring?”

To whom swift Iris thus: “To thee I come
By Juno sent, th’ imperial wife of Jove;
Unknown to Saturn’s son, and all the Gods
Who on Olympus’ snowy summit dwell.”

To whom again Achilles, swift of foot:
“How in the battle toil can I engage?
My arms are with the Trojans; and to boot
My mother warn’d me not to arm for fight,
Till I again should see her; for she hop’d
To bring me heav’nly arms by Vulcan wrought:
Nor know I well whose armour I could wear,
Save the broad shield of Ajax Telamon
And he, methinks, amid the foremost ranks
Ev’n now is fighting o’er Patroclus’ corpse.”

Whom answer’d storm-swift Iris: “Well we know
Thy glorious arms are by the Trojans held;
But go thou forth, and from above the ditch
Appear before them; daunted at the sight,
Haply the Trojans may forsake the field,
And breathing-time afford the sons of Greece,
Toil-worn; for little pause has yet been theirs.”

Swift Iris said, and vanish’d; then uprose
Achilles, dear to Jove; and Pallas threw
Her tassell’d aegis o’er his shoulders broad;
His head encircling with a coronet
Of golden cloud, whence fiery flashes gleam’d.
As from an island city up to Heav’n
The smoke ascends, which hostile forces round
Beleaguer, and all day with cruel war
From its own state cut off; but when the sun
Hath set, blaze frequent forth the beacon fires;
High rise the flames, and to the dwellers round
Their signal flash, if haply o’er the sea
May come the needful aid; so brightly flash’d
That fiery light around Achilles’ head.
He left the wall, and stood above the ditch,
But from the Greeks apart, rememb’ring well
His mother’s prudent counsel; there he stood,
And shouted loudly; Pallas join’d her voice,
And fill’d with terror all the Trojan host.
Clear as the trumpet’s sound, which calls to arms
Some town, encompass’d round with hostile bands,
Rang out the voice of great Æacides.
But when Achilles’ voice of brass they heard,
They quail’d in spirit; the sleek-skin’d steeds themselves,
Conscious of coming ill, bore back the cars:
Their charioteers, dismay’d, beheld the flame
Which, kindled by the blue-ey’d Goddess, blaz’d
Unquench’d around the head of Peleus’ son.
Thrice shouted from the ditch the godlike chief;
Thrice terror struck both Trojans and Allies;
And there and then beside their chariots fell
Twelve of their bravest; while the Greeks, well pleas’d,
Patroclus’ body from the fray withdrew,
And on a litter laid; around him stood
His comrades mourning; with them, Peleus’ son,
Shedding hot tears, as on his friend he gaz’d,
Laid on the bier, and pierc’d with deadly wounds:
Him to the war with horses and with cars
He sent; but ne’er to welcome his return.
By stag-ey’d Juno sent, reluctant sank
Th’ unwearied sun beneath the ocean wave;
The sun had set, and breath’d awhile the Greeks
From the fierce labours of the balanc’d field;
Nor less the Trojans, from the stubborn fight
Retiring, from the chariots loos’d their steeds:
But ere they shar’d the ev’ning meal, they met
In council; all stood up; none dar’d to sit;
For fear had fallen on all, when reappear’d
Achilles, from the battle long withdrawn.
First Panthous’ son, the sage Polydamas,
Address’d th’ assembly; his sagacious mind
Alone beheld the future and the past;
The friend of Hector, born the selfsame night;
One in debate, the other best in arms;
Who thus with prudent speech began, and said:

“Be well advis’d, my friends! my counsel is
That we regain the city, nor the morn
Here in the plain, beside the ships, await,
So far remov’d from our protecting walls.
While fiercely burn’d ’gainst Atreus’ godlike son
That mighty warrior’s wrath, ’twas easier far
With th’ other Greeks to deal; and I rejoic’d
When by the ships we pass’d the night, in hopes
We soon might call them ours; but now, I own
Achilles, swift of foot, excites my fear.
His proud, impetuous spirit will spurn the plain,
Where Greeks and Trojans oft in warlike strife
Their balanc’d strength exert; if he come forth,
Our fight will be to guard our homes and wives.
Gain we the city; trust me, so ’twere best.
Now, for a while, ambrosial night detains
The son of Peleus; but at early morn
If issuing forth in arms he find us here,
His prowess we shall know; and happy he
Who, flying, shall in safety reach the walls
Of sacred Troy; for many a Trojan slain
Shall feed the vultures; Heav’n avert such fate!
But if, though loth, ye will by me be rul’d,
This night in council husband we our strength;
While tow’rs, and lofty gates, and folding doors
Close join’d, well-fitting, shall our city guard:
Then issuing forth in arms at early morn
Man we the tow’rs; so harder were his task
If, from the ships advancing, round the wall
He offer battle; bootless to return,
His strong-neck’d horses worn with labour vain
In coursing, purposeless, around the town.
To force an entrance, or the town destroy,
Is not his aim; and ere that end be gain’d,
The dogs of Troy upon his flesh shall feed.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm
With stern regard: “Polydamas, thy words
Are such as grate unkindly on mine ear,
Who fain wouldst have us to the walls retire.
What? have ye not already long enough
Been coop’d within the tow’rs? the wealth of Troy,
Its brass, its gold, were once the common theme
Of ev’ry tongue; our hoarded treasures now
Are gone, to Phrygian and Maeonian shores
For sale exported, costly merchandise,
Since on our city fell the wrath of Jove.
And now, when deep-designing Saturn’s son
Such glory gives me as to gain the ships,
And, crowded by the sea, hem in the Greeks,
Fool! put not thou these timid counsels forth,
Which none will follow, nor will I allow.
But hear ye all, and do as I advise:
Share now the meal, by ranks, throughout the host;
Then set your watch, and each keep careful guard;
And whom his spoils o’erload, if such there be,
Let him divide them with the gen’ral crowd;
Better that they should hold them than the Greeks:
And with the morn, in arms, beside the ships,
Will we again awake the furious war.
But if indeed Achilles by the ships
Hath reappear’d, himself, if so he choose,
Shall be the suff’rer; from the perilous strife
I will not shrink, but his encounter meet:
So he, or I, shall gain immortal fame;
Impartial Mars hath oft the slayer slain.”

Thus Hector spoke; the Trojans cheer’d aloud:
Fools, and by Pallas of their sense bereft,
Who all applauded Hector’s ill advice,
None the sage counsel of Polydamas!
Then through the camp they shar’d the ev’ning meal.

Meantime the Greeks all night with tears and groans
Bewail’d Patroclus: on his comrade’s breast
Achilles laid his murder-dealing hands,
And led with bitter groans the loud lament.
As when the hunters, in the forest’s depth,
Have robb’d a bearded lion of his cubs;
Too late arriving, he with anger chafes;
Then follows, if perchance he may o’ertake,
Through many a mountain glen, the hunters’ steps,
With grief and fury fill’d; so Peleus’ son,
With bitter groans, the Myrmidons address’d:

“Vain was, alas! the promise which I gave,
Seeking the brave Menoetius to console,
To bring to Opus back his gallant son,
Rich with his share of spoil from Troy o’erthrown;
But Jove fulfils not all that man designs:
For us hath fate decreed, that here in Troy
We two one soil should redden with our blood;
Nor me, returning to my native land,
Shall aged Peleus in his halls receive,
Nor Thetis; here must earth retain my bones.
But since, Patroclus, I am doom’d on earth
Behind thee to remain, thy fun’ral rites
I will not celebrate, till Hector’s arms,
And head, thy haughty slayer’s, here I bring;
And on thy pyre twelve noble sons of Troy
Will sacrifice, in vengeance of thy death.
Thou by our beaked ships till then must lie;
And weeping o’er thee shall deep-bosom’d dames,
Trojan and Dardan, mourn both night and day;
The prizes of our toil, when wealthy towns
Before our valour and our spears have fall’n.”

He said, and bade his comrades on the fire
An ample tripod place, without delay
To cleanse Patroclus from the bloody gore:
They on the burning fire the tripod plac’d,
With water fill’d, and kindled wood beneath.
Around the bellying tripod rose the flames,
Heating the bath; within the glitt’ring brass
Soon as the water boil’d, they wash’d the corpse,
With lissom oils anointing, and the wounds
With fragrant ointments fill’d, of nine years old;
Then in fine linen they the body wrapp’d
From head to feet, and laid it on a couch.
And cover’d over with a fair white sheet.
All night around Achilles swift of foot
The Myrmidons with tears Patroclus mourn’d.

To Juno then, his sister and his wife,
Thus Saturn’s son: “At length thou hast thy will,
Imperial Juno, who hast stirr’d to war
Achilles swift of foot; well might one deem
These long-hair’d Greeks from thee deriv’d their birth.”

To whom in answer thus the stag-ey’d Queen:
“What words, dread son of Saturn, dost thou speak?
E’en man, though mortal, and inferior far
To us in wisdom, might so much effect
Against his fellow-man; then how should I,
By double title chief of Goddesses,
First by my birth, and next because thy wife
I boast me, thine, o’er all the Gods supreme,
Not work my vengeance on the Trojan race?”

Such, converse while they held, to Vulcan’s house,
Immortal, starlike bright, among the Gods
Unrivall’d, all of brass, by Vulcan’s self
Constructed, sped the silver-footed Queen.
Him swelt’ring at his forge she found, intent
On forming twenty tripods, which should stand
The wall surrounding of his well-built house;
With golden wheels beneath he furnish’d each,
And to th’ assembly of the Gods endued
With pow’r to move spontaneous, and return,
A marvel to behold! thus far his work
He had completed; but not yet had fix’d
The rich-wrought handles; these his labour now
Engag’d, to fit them, and to rivet fast.
While thus he exercis’d his practis’d skill,
The silver-footed Queen approach’d the house.
Charis, the skilful artist’s wedded wife,
Beheld her coming, and advanc’d to meet;
And, as her hand she clasp’d, address’d her thus:

“Say, Thetis of the flowing robe, belov’d
And honour’d, whence this visit to our house,
An unaccustom’d guest? but come thou in,
That I may welcome thee with honour due.”

Thus, as she spoke, the Goddess led her in,
And on a seat with silver studs adorn’d,
Fair, richly wrought, a footstool at her feet,
She bade her sit; then thus to Vulcan call’d:
“Haste hither, Vulcan; Thetis asks thine aid.”

Whom answer’d thus the skill’d artificer:
“An honour’d and a venerated guest
Our house contains; who sav’d me once from woe,
When by my mother’s act from Heav’n I fell,
Who, for that I was crippled in my feet,
Deem’d it not shame to hide me: hard had then
My fortune been, had not Eurynome
And Thetis in their bosoms shelter’d me;
Eurynome, from old Oceanus
Who drew her birth, the ever-circling flood.
Nine years with them I dwelt, and many a work
I fashion’d there of metal, clasps, and chains
Of spiral coil, rich cups, and collars fair,
Hid in a cave profound; where th’ ocean stream
With ceaseless murmur foam’d and moan’d around;
Unknown to God or man, but to those two
Who sav’d me, Thetis and Eurynome.
Now to my house hath fair-hair’d Thetis come;
To her, my life preserv’d its tribute owes:
Then thou the hospitable rites perform.
While I my bellows and my tools lay by.”

He said, and from the anvil rear’d upright
His massive strength; and as he limp’d along,
His tottering knees were bow’d beneath his weight.
The bellows from the fire he next withdrew,
And in a silver casket plac’d his tools;
Then with a sponge his brows and lusty arms
He wip’d, and sturdy neck and hairy chest.
He donn’d his robe, and took his weighty staff;
Then through the door with halting step he pass’d;
There waited on their King the attendant maids;
In form as living maids, but wrought in gold;
Instinct with consciousness, with voice endued,
And strength, and skill from heav’nly teachers drawn.
These waited, duteous, at the Monarch’s side,
His steps supporting; he, with halting gait,
Pass’d to a gorgeous chair by Thetis’ side,
And, as her hand he clasp’d, address’d her thus:

“Say, Thetis of the flowing robe, belov’d
And honour’d, whence this visit to our house.
An unaccustom’d guest? say what thy will,
And, if within my pow’r, esteem it done.”

To whom in answer Thetis, weeping, thus:
“Vulcan, of all the Goddesses who dwell
On high Olympus, lives there one whose soul
Hath borne such weight of woe, so many griefs,
As Saturn’s son hath heap’d on me alone?
Me, whom he chose from all the sea-born nymphs,
And gave to Peleus, son of Æacus,
His subject; I endur’d a mortal’s bed,
Though sore against my will; he now, bent down
By feeble age, lies helpless in his house.
Now adds he farther grief; he granted me
To bear, and rear, a son, of heroes chief;
Like a young tree he throve; I tended him,
In a rich vineyard as the choicest plant:
Till in the beaked ships I sent him forth
To war with Troy; him ne’er shall I receive,
Returning home, in aged Peleus’ house.
E’en while he lives, and sees the light of day,
He lives in sorrow; nor, to soothe his grief,
My presence can avail; a girl, his prize,
Selected for him by the sons of Greece,
Great Agamemnon wrested from his arms:
In grief and rage he pin’d his soul away;
Then by the Trojans were the Greeks hemm’d in
Beside their ships, and from within their camp
No outlet found; the Grecian Elders then
Implor’d his aid, and promis’d costly gifts.
With his own hand to save them he refus’d;
But, in his armour clad, to battle sent
His friend Patroclus, with a num’rous band.
All day they fought before the Scaean* gates;
And in that day had Ilium been destroy’d,
But in the van, Menoetius’ noble son.
After great deeds achiev’d, Apollo slew,
And crown’d with glory Hector, Priam’s son.
Therefore a suppliant to thy knees I come,
If to my son, to early death condemn’d,
Thou wilt accord the boon of shield and helm,
And well-wrought greaves with silver clasps secur’d,
And breastplate; for his own, his faithful friend,
By Trojan hands subdued, hath lost; and he,
O’erwhelm’d with grief, lies prostrate on the earth.”

Whom answer’d thus the skill’d artificer:
“Take comfort, nor let this disturb thy mind;
Would that as surely, when his hour shall come,
I could defend him from the stroke of death,
As I can undertake that his shall be
Such arms as they shall marvel who behold.”

He left her thus, and to his forge return’d;
The bellows then directing to the fire,
He bade them work; through twenty pipes at once
Forthwith they pour’d their diverse-temper’d blasts;
Now briskly seconding his eager haste,
Now at his will, and as the work requir’d.
The stubborn brass, and tin, and precious gold,
And silver, first he melted in the fire,
Then on its stand his weighty anvil plac’d;
And with one hand the hammer’s pond’rous weight
He wielded, while the other grasp’d the tongs.

And first a shield he fashion’d, vast and strong,
With rich adornment; circled with a rim,
Threefold, bright-gleaming, whence a silver belt
Depended; of five folds the shield was form’d;
And on its surface many a rare design
Of curious art his practis’d skill had wrought.

Thereon were figur’d earth, and sky, and sea,
The ever-circling sun, and full-orb’d moon,
And all the signs that crown the vault of Heav’n;
Pleiads and Hyads, and Orion’s might,
And Arctos, call’d the Wain, who wheels on high
His circling course, and on Orion waits;
Sole star that never bathes in th’ ocean wave.

And two fair populous towns were sculptur’d there;
In one were marriage pomp and revelry.
And brides, in gay procession, through the streets
With blazing torches from their chambers borne,
While frequent rose the hymeneal song.
Youths whirl’d around in joyous dance, with sound
Of flute and harp; and, standing at their doors,
Admiring women on the pageant gaz’d.

Meanwhile a busy throng the forum fill’d:
There between two a fierce contention rose,
About a death-fine; to the public one
Appeal’d, asserting to have paid the whole;
While one denied that he had aught receiv’d.
Both were desirous that before the Judge
The issue should be tried; with noisy shouts
Their several partisans encourag’d each.
The heralds still’d the tumult of the crowd:
On polish’d chairs, in solemn circle, sat
The rev’rend Elders; in their hands they held
The loud-voic’d heralds’ sceptres; waving these,
They heard th’ alternate pleadings; in the midst
Two talents lay of gold, which he should take
Who should before them prove his righteous cause.

Before the second town two armies lay,
In arms refulgent; to destroy the town
Th’ assailants threaten’d, or among themselves
Of all the wealth within the city stor’d
An equal half, as ransom, to divide.
The terms rejecting, the defenders mann’d
A secret ambush; on the walls they plac’d
Women and children muster’d for defence,
And men by age enfeebled; forth they went,
By Mars and Pallas led; these, wrought in gold,
In golden arms array’d, above the crowd
For beauty and stature, as befitting Gods,
Conspicuous shone; of lesser height the rest.
But when the destin’d ambuscade was reach’d,
Beside the river, where the shepherds drove
Their flocks and herds to water, down they lay,
In glitt’ring arms accoutred; and apart
They plac’d two spies, to notify betimes
Th’ approach of flocks of sheep and lowing herds.
These, in two shepherds’ charge, ere long appear’d,
Who, unsuspecting as they mov’d along,
Enjoy’d the music of their past’ral pipes.
They on the booty, from afar discern’d,
Sprang from their ambuscade; and cutting off
The herds, and fleecy flocks, their guardians slew.
Their comrades heard the tumult, where they sat
Before their sacred altars, and forthwith
Sprang on their cars, and with fast-stepping steeds
Pursued the plund’rers, and o’ertook them soon.
There on the river’s bank they met in arms,
And each at other hurl’d their brazen spears.
And there were figur’d Strife, and Tumult wild,
And deadly Fate, who in her iron grasp
One newly-wounded, one unwounded bore,
While by the feet from out the press she dragg’d
Another slain: about her shoulders hung
A garment crimson’d with the blood of men.
Like living men they seem’d to move, to fight,
To drag away the bodies of the slain.

And there was grav’n a wide-extended plain
Of fallow land, rich, fertile, mellow soil,
Thrice plough’d; where many ploughmen up and down
Their teams were driving; and as each attain’d
The limit of the field, would one advance,
And tender him a cup of gen’rous wine:
Then would he turn, and to the end again
Along the furrow cheerly drive his plough.
And still behind them darker show’d the soil,
The true presentment of a new-plough’d field,
Though wrought in gold; a miracle of art.

There too was grav’n a corn-field, rich in grain,
Where with sharp sickles reapers plied their task,
And thick, in even swathe, the trusses fell;
The binders, following close, the bundles tied:
Three were the binders; and behind them boys
In close attendance waiting, in their arms
Gather’d the bundles, and in order pil’d.
Amid them, staff in hand, in silence stood
The King, rejoicing in the plenteous swathe.
A little way remov’d, the heralds slew
A sturdy ox, and now beneath an oak
Prepar’d the feast; while women mix’d, hard by,
White barley porridge for the lab’rers’ meal.

And, with rich clusters laden, there was grav’n
A vineyard fair, all gold; of glossy black
The bunches were, on silver poles sustain’d;
Around, a darksome trench; beyond, a fence
Was wrought, of shining tin; and through it led
One only path, by which the bearers pass’d,
Who gather’d in the vineyard’s bounteous store.
There maids and youths, in joyous spirits bright,
In woven baskets bore the luscious fruit.
A boy, amid them, from a clear-ton’d harp
Drew lovely music; well his liquid voice
The strings accompanied; they all with dance
And song harmonious join’d, and joyous shouts,
As the gay bevy lightly tripp’d along.

Of straight-horn’d cattle too a herd was grav’n;
Of gold and tin the heifers all were wrought:
They to the pasture, from the cattle-yard,
With gentle lowings, by a babbling stream,
Where quiv’ring reed-beds rustled, slowly mov’d.
Four golden shepherds walk’d beside the herd,
By nine swift dogs attended; then amid
The foremost heifers sprang two lions fierce
Upon the lordly bull: he, bellowing loud,
Was dragg’d along, by dogs and youths pursued.
The tough bull’s-hide they tore, and gorging lapp’d
Th’ intestines and dark blood; with vain attempt
The herdsmen following closely, to the attack
Cheer’d their swift dogs; these shunn’d the lions’ jaws,
And close around them baying, held aloof.

And there the skilful artist’s hand had trac’d
A pastaro broad, with fleecy flocks o’erspread,
In a fair glade, with fold, and tents, and pens.

There, too, the skilful artist’s hand had wrought
With curious workmanship, a mazy dance,
Like that which Daedalus in Cnossus erst
At fair-hair’d Ariadne’s bidding fram’d.
There, laying each on other’s wrists their hand,
Bright youths and many-suitor’d maidens danc’d:
In fair white linen these; in tunics those,
Well woven, shining soft with fragrant oils;
These with fair coronets were crown’d, while those
With golden swords from silver belts were girt.
Now whirl’d they round with nimble practis’d feet,
Easy, as when a potter, seated, turns
A wheel, new fashion’d by his skilful hand,
And spins it round, to prove if true it run;
Now featly mov’d in well-beseeming ranks.
A num’rous crowd, around, the lovely dance
Survey’d, delighted; while an honour’d Bard
Sang, as he struck the lyre, and to the strain
Two tumblers, in the midst, were whirling round.

About the margin of the massive shield
Was wrought the mighty strength of th’ ocean stream.

The shield completed, vast and strong, he forg’d
A breastplate, dazzling bright as flame of fire;
And next, a weighty helmet for his head,
Fair, richly wrought, with crest of gold above;
Then last, well-fitting greaves of pliant tin.

The skill’d artificer his works complete
Before Achilles’ Goddess-mother laid:
She, like a falcon, from the snow-clad heights
Of huge Olympus, darted swiftly down,
Charg’d with the glitt’ring arms by Vulcan wrought.



ARGUMENT.

THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.


Thetis brings to her son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves the
body of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the
army, to declare his resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are
solemnly reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that
occasion. Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from
the battle till the troops have refreshed themselves, by the advice of
Ulysses. The presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles: where
Briseis laments over the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinately
refuses all repast, and gives himself up to lamentations for his
friend. Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the order of Jupiter. He
arms for the fight; his appearance described. He addresses himself to
his horses, and reproaches them with the death of Patroclus. One of
them is miraculously endued with voice, and inspired to prophesy his
fate; but the hero, not astonished by that prodigy, rushes with fury to
the combat.

The thirtieth day. The scene is on the sea-shore.

BOOK XIX.

Now morn in saffron robe, from th’ ocean stream
Ascending, light diffus’d o’er Gods and men;
As Thetis, to the ships returning, bore
The gift of Vulcan; there her son she found,
Who o’er Patroclus hung in bitter grief;
Around him mourn’d his comrades; in the midst
She stood, and clasp’d his hand, as thus she spoke:

“Leave we, my son, though deep our grief, the dead;
Here let him lie, since Heav’n hath doom’d his fall;
But thou these arms receive, by Vulcan sent,
Fairer than e’er on mortal breast were borne.”
The arms before Achilles, as she spoke,
The Goddess laid; loud rang the wondrous work.
With awe the Myrmidons beheld; nor dar’d
Affront the sight: but as Achilles gaz’d,
More fiery burn’d his wrath; beneath his brows
His eyes like lightning flash’d; with fierce delight
He seiz’d the glorious gift: and when his soul
Had feasted on the miracle of art,
To Thetis thus his winged words address’d:

“Mother, the God hath giv’n me arms indeed,
Worthy a God, and such as mortal man
Could never forge; I go to arm me straight;
Yet fear I for Menoetius’ noble son,
Lest in his spear-inflicted wounds the flies
May gender worms, and desecrate the dead,
And, life extinct, corruption reach his flesh.”

Whom answer’d thus the silver-footed Queen:
“Let not such fears, my son, disturb thy mind:
I will myself the swarms of flies disperse,
That on the flesh of slaughter’d warriors prey:
And should he here remain a year complete,
Still should his flesh be firm and fresh as now:
But thou to council call the chiefs of Greece;
Against the monarch Agamemnon there,
The leader of the host, abjure thy wrath;
Then arm thee quickly, and put on thy might.”

Her words with dauntless courage fill’d his breast.
She in Patroclus’ nostrils, to preserve
His flesh, red nectar and ambrosia pour’d.

Along the ocean beach Achilles pass’d,
And loudly shouting, call’d on all the chiefs;
Then all who heretofore remain’d on board,
The steersmen, who the vessels’ rudders hold,
The very stewards that serv’d the daily bread,
All to th’ assembly throng’d, when reappear’d
Achilles, from the fight so long withdrawn.
Two noble chiefs, two ministers of Mars,
Ulysses sage, and valiant Diomed,
Appear’d, yet crippled by their grievous wounds,
Their halting steps supporting with their spears,
And on the foremost seats their places took.
Next follow’d Agamemnon, King of men,
He also wounded; for Antenor’s son,
Coon, had stabb’d him in the stubborn fight.
When all the Greeks were closely throng’d around,
Up rose Achilles swift of foot, and said:

“Great son of Atreus, what hath been the gain
To thee or me, since heart-consuming strife
Hath fiercely rag’d between us, for a girl,
Who would to Heav’n had died by Dian’s shafts
That day when from Lyrnessus’ captur’d town
I bore her off? so had not many a Greek
Bitten the bloody dust, by hostile hands
Subdued, while I in anger stood aloof.
Great was the gain to Troy; but Greeks, methinks,
Will long retain the mem’ry of our feud.
Yet pass we that; and though our hearts be sore,
Still let us school our angry spirits down.
My wrath I here abjure; it is not meet
It burn for ever unappeas’d; do thou
Muster to battle straight the long-hair’d Greeks;
That, to the Trojans once again oppos’d,
I may make trial if beside the ships
They dare this night remain; but he, I ween,
Will gladly rest his limbs, who safe shall fly,
My spear escaping, from the battle-field.”

He said: the well-greav’d Greeks rejoic’d to hear
His wrath abjur’d by Peleus’ godlike son;
And from his seat, not standing in the midst,
Thus to th’ assembly Agamemnon spoke:
“Friends, Grecian Heroes, Ministers of Mars,
When one stands up to speak, ’tis meet for all
To lend a patient ear, nor interrupt;
For e’en to practis’d speakers hard the task:
But, in this vast assembly, who can speak
That all may hear? the clearest voice must fail.
To Peleus’ son, Achilles, I my mind
Will frankly open; ye among yourselves
Impart the words I speak, that all may know.
Oft hath this matter been by Greeks discuss’d,
And I their frequent censure have incurr’d:
Yet was not I the cause; but Jove, and Fate,
And gloomy Erinnys, who combin’d to throw
A strong delusion o’er my mind, that day
I robb’d Achilles of his lawful prize.
What could I do? a Goddess all o’er-rul’d,
Daughter of Jove, dread Ate, baleful pow’r,
Misleading all; with lightest step she moves,
Not on the earth, but o’er the heads of men,
With blighting touch; and many hath caus’d to err.
E’en Jove, the wisest deem’d of Gods and men,
In error she involv’d, when Juno’s art
By female stratagem the God deceiv’d,
When in well-girdled Thebes Alcmena lay
In travail of the might of Hercules.
In boastful tone amid the Gods he spoke:
‘Hear all ye Gods, and all ye Goddesses,
The words I speak, the promptings of my soul.
This day Lucina shall to light bring forth
A child, the future Lord of all around,
Of mortal men, who trace to me their blood.’
Whom answer’d Juno thus, with deep deceit:
‘Thou dost but feign, nor wilt fulfil thy word:
Come now, Olympian, swear a solemn oath
That he shall be the Lord of all around,
Who on this day shall be of woman born,
Of mortal men, who trace to thee their blood.’
She said, and Jove, the snare unseeing, swore
A solemn oath; but found his error soon.
Down from Olympus’ height she sped in haste
To Argos of Achaia; for the wife
Of Sthenelus, the son of Perseus, there,
She knew, was sev’n months pregnant of a son;
Whom, though untimely born, she brought to light,
Staying meanwhile Alcmena’s labour-pangs,
To Saturn’s son herself the tidings brought,
And thus address’d him: ‘Jove, the lightning’s Lord,
I bring thee news; this day a mighty man,
By thee ordain’d to be the Argives’ King,
Is born, Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus,
The son of Perseus, issue of thy blood;
Well worthy he to be the Argives’ King.’
She said: keen sorrow deeply pierc’d his soul;
Then Ate by the glossy locks he seiz’d
In mighty wrath; and swore a solemn oath,
That to Olympus and the starry Heav’n
She never should return, who all misleads.
His arm then whirling, from the starry Heav’n
He flung her down, to vex th’ affairs of men.
Yet oft her fraud remember’d he with groans,
When by Eurystheus’ hard commands he saw
Condemn’d to servile tasks his noble son.
So, oft as Hector of the glancing helm
Beside the ships the Greeks to slaughter gave,
Back to my mind my former error came.
I err’d, for Jove my judgment took away;
But friendly reconcilement now I seek,
And tender costly presents; then thyself
Uprouse thee, and excite the rest to arms.
While I prepare the gifts, whate’er of late[6]
The sage Ulysses promis’d in thy tent:
Or, if thou wilt, though eager for the fray,
Remain thou here awhile, till from my ship
My followers bring the gifts; that thou mayst see
I make my offerings with no niggard hand.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles swift of foot:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
The gifts thou deem’st befitting, ’tis for thee
To give, or to withhold; but now at once
Prepare we for the battle; ’tis not meet
On trivial pretexts here to waste our time,
Or idly loiter; much remains to do:
Again be seen Achilles in the van,
Scatt’ring with brazen spear the Trojan ranks;
And ye, forget not man with man to fight.”

To whom in answer sage Ulysses thus:
“Brave as thou art, Achilles, godlike chief,
Yet fasting lead not forth the sons of Greece
To fight the Trojans; for no little time
Will last the struggle, when the serried ranks
Are once engag’d in conflict, and the Gods
With equal courage either side inspire:
But bid them, by the ships, of food and wine
(Wherein are strength and courage) first partake;
For none throughout the day till set of sun,
Fasting from food, may bear the toils of war;
His spirit may still be eager for the fray;
Yet are his limbs by slow degrees weigh’d down,
Himself by thirst and hunger worn, his knees
Unable, as he moves, to bear his weight.
But he who, first with food and wine refresh’d,
All day maintains the combat with the foe,
His spirit retains unbroken, and his limbs
Unwearied, till both armies quit the field.
Disperse then now the crowd, and bid prepare
The morning meal; meantime to public view
Let Agamemnon, King of men, display
His costly gifts; that all the Greeks may see,
And that thy heart within thee melt with joy:
And there in full assembly let him swear
A solemn oath, that he hath ne’er approach’d
The fair Briseis’ bed, nor held with her
Such intercourse as man with woman holds.
Be thou propitious, and accept his oath.
Then at a sumptuous banquet in his tent
Let him receive thee; that thine honour due
May nothing lack; and so, Atrides, thou
Shalt stand in sight of all men clear of blame;
For none can wonder that insulting speech
Should rouse the anger of a sceptred King.”

To whom thus Agamemnon, King of men:
“Son of Laertes, I accept thy speech
With cordial welcome: all that thou hast said
Is well and wisely spoken; for the oath,
I am prepar’d, with willing mind, to swear;
Nor in the sight of Heav’n will be forsworn.
Let then Achilles here awhile remain,
Though eager for the fray; ye too remain,
Until the presents from my tent be brought,
And we our solemn compact ratify.
Then this command upon thyself I lay:
That thou the noblest youths of all the Greeks
Select, and bid them from my vessel bear
The gifts, which, to Achilles yesternight
We promis’d, and withal the women bring;
And let Talthybius through the host seek out
A boar, for sacrifice to Jove and Sol.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles swift of foot:
“Most mighty Agamemnon, King of men,
These matters to some future time were best
Deferr’d, some hour of respite from the fight,
Of rage less fiercely burning in my breast;
But slaughter’d now they lie, whom Priam’s son,
Hector, hath slain, by Jove to vict’ry led.
Ye bid us take our food; if I might rule,
I would to battle lead the sons of Greece,
Unfed, and fasting; and at set of sun,
Our shame aveng’d, an ample feast prepare;
Till then, nor food nor drink shall pass my lips,
My comrade slain; who pierc’d with mortal wounds,
Turn’d tow’rd the doorway, lies within my tent,
His mourning friends around; while there he lies,
No thought have I for these or aught beside,
Save carnage, blood, and groans of dying men.”

To whom Ulysses, sage in council, thus:
“O son of Peleus, noblest of the Greeks,
How far, Achilles, thou surpassest me
In deeds of arms, I know: but thou must yield
To me in counsel, for my years are more,
And my experience greater far than thine:
Then to my words incline a patient ear.
Men soonest weary of battle, where the sword
The bloodiest harvest reaps; the lightest crop
Of slaughter is where Jove inclines the scale,
Dispenser, at his will, of human wars.
The Greeks by fasting cannot mourn their dead;
For day by day successive numbers fall;
Where were the respite then from ceaseless fast?
Behoves us bury out of sight our dead,
Steeling our hearts, and weeping but a day;
And we, the rest, whom cruel war has spar’d,
Should first with food and wine recruit our strength;
Then, girding on our arms, the livelong day
Maintain the war, unwearied; then let none
Require a farther summons to the field;
(And woe to him who loit’ring by the ships
That summons hears;) but with united force
Against the Trojans wake the furious war.”

He said, and call’d on noble Nestor’s sons,
On Meges, Phyleus’ son, Meriones,
Thoas, and Lycomedes, Creon’s son,
And Melanippus; they together sought
The mighty monarch Agamemnon’s tent.
Soon as the word was giv’n, the work was done;
Sev’n tripods brought they out, the promis’d gifts;
Twelve horses, twenty caldrons glitt’ring bright;
Sev’n women too, well skill’d in household cares,
With whom, the eighth, the fair Briseis came.
Ulysses led the way, and with him brought
Ten talents full of gold; th’ attendant youths
The other presents bore, and in the midst
Display’d before th’ assembly: then uprose
The monarch Agamemnon; by his side,
With voice of godlike pow’r, Talthybius stood,
Holding the victim: then Atrides drew
The dagger, ever hanging at his side,
Close by the scabbard of his mighty sword,
And from the victim’s head the bristles shore.
With hands uplifted then to Jove he pray’d;
While all around the Greeks in silence stood,
List’ning, decorous, to the monarch’s words,
As looking up to Heav’n he made his pray’r:

“Be witness, Jove, thou highest, first of Gods,
And Sun, and Earth, and ye who vengeance wreak
Beneath the earth on souls of men forsworn,
Furies! that never, or to love unchaste
Soliciting, or otherwise, my hand
Hath fair Briseis touch’d; but in my tent
Still pure and undefil’d hath she remain’d:
And if in this I be forsworn, may Heav’n
With all the plagues afflict me, due to those
Who sin by perjur’d oaths against the Gods.”

Thus as he spoke, across the victim’s throat
He drew the pitiless blade; Talthybius then
To hoary Ocean’s depths the carcase threw,
Food for the fishes; then Achilles rose,
And thus before th’ assembled Greeks he spoke:

“O Father Jove, how dost thou lead astray
Our human judgments! ne’er had Atreus’ son
My bosom fill’d with wrath, nor from my arms,
To his own loss, against my will had torn
The girl I lov’d, but that the will of Jove
To death predestin’d many a valiant Greek.
Now to the meal; anon renew the war.”

This said, th’ assembly he dismiss’d in haste,
The crowd dispersing to their sev’ral ships;
Upon the gifts the warlike Myrmidons
Bestow’d their care, and bore them to the ships;
Of Peleus’ godlike son; within the tent
They laid them down, and there the women plac’d,
While to the drove the followers led the steeds.
Briseis, fair as golden Venus, saw
Patroclus lying, pierc’d with mortal wounds,
Within the tent; and with a bitter cry,
She flung her down upon the corpse, and tore
Her breast, her delicate neck, and beauteous cheeks;
And, weeping, thus the lovely woman wail’d:

“Patroclus, dearly lov’d of this sad heart!
When last I left this tent, I left thee full
Of healthy life; returning now, I find
Only thy lifeless corpse, thou Prince of men!
So sorrow still, on sorrow heap’d, I bear.
The husband of my youth, to whom my sire
And honour’d mother gave me, I beheld
Slain with the sword before the city walls:
Three brothers, whom with me one mother bore,
My dearly lov’d ones, all were doom’d to death:
Nor wouldst thou, when Achilles swift of foot
My husband slew, and royal Mynes’ town
In ruin laid, allow my tears to flow;
But thou wouldst make me (such was still thy speech)
The wedded wife of Peleus’ godlike son:
Thou wouldst to Phthia bear me in thy ship,
And there, thyself, amid the Myrmidons,
Wouldst give my marriage feast; then, unconsol’d,
I weep thy death, my ever-gentle friend!”

Weeping, she spoke; the women join’d her wail:
Patroclus’ death the pretext for their tears,
But each in secret wept her private griefs.

Around Achilles throng’d the elder men,
Urging to eat; but he, with groans, refus’d:
“I pray you, would you show your love, dear friends,
Ask me not now with food or drink to appease
Hunger or thirst; a load of bitter grief
Weighs heavy on my soul; till set of sun
Fasting will I remain, and still endure.”

The other monarchs at his word withdrew:
The two Atridae, and Ulysses sage,
And Nestor and Idomeneus remain’d,
And aged Phoenix, to divert his grief;
But comfort none, save in the bloody jaws
Of battle would he take; by mem’ry stirr’d,
He heav’d a deep-drawn sigh, as thus he spoke:

“How oft hast thou, ill-fated, dearest friend,
Here in this tent with eager zeal prepar’d
The tempting meal, whene’er the sons of Greece
In haste would arm them for the bloody fray!
Now liest thou there, while I, for love of thee,
From food and drink, before me plac’d, refrain:
For ne’er shall I again such sorrow know,
Not though I heard of aged Peleus’ death,
Who now in Phthia mourns, with tender tears,
His absent son; he on a foreign shore
Is warring in that hateful Helen’s cause:
No, nor of his, who now in Scyros’ isle
Is growing up, if yet indeed he live,
Young Neoptolemus, my godlike son.
My hope had been indeed, that here in Troy,
Far from the plains of Argos, I alone
Was doom’d to die; and that to Phthia thou,
Return’d in safety, mightst my son convey
From Scyros home, and show him all my wealth,
My spoils, my slaves, my lofty, spacious house.
For Peleus or to death, methinks, e’en now
Hath yielded, or not far from death remov’d,
Lives on in sorrow, bow’d by gloomy age,
Expecting day by day the messenger
Who bears the mournful tidings of my death.”

Weeping, Achilles spoke; and with him wept
The Elders; each to fond remembrance mov’d
Of all that in his home himself had left.
The son of Saturn, pitying, saw their grief,
And Pallas thus with winged words address’d:
“My child, dost thou a hero’s cause forsake,
Or does Achilles claim no more thy care,
Who sits in sorrow by the high-prow’d ships,
Mourning his comrade slain? the others all
Partake the meal, while he from food abstains:
Then haste thee, and, with hunger lest he faint,
Drop nectar and ambrosia on his breast.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal:
Down, like the long-wing’d falcon, shrill of voice,
Thro’ the clear sky she swoop’d: and while the Greeks
Arm’d for the fight, Achilles she approach’d,
And nectar and ambrosia on his breast
Distill’d, lest hunger should his strength subdue;
Back to her mighty Father’s ample house
Returning, as from out the ships they pour’d.
Thick as the snow-flakes that from Heav’n descend,
Before the sky-born Boreas’ chilling blast;
So thick, outpouring from the ships, the stream
Of helmets polish’d bright, and bossy shields,
And breastplates firmly brac’d, and ashen spears:
Their brightness flash’d to Heav’n; and laugh’d the Earth
Beneath the brazen glare; loud rang the tramp
Of armed men: Achilles in the midst,
The godlike chief, in dazzling arms array’d.
His teeth were gnashing audibly; his eye
Blaz’d with, the light of fire; but in his heart
Was grief unbearable; with furious wrath
He burn’d against the Trojans, as he donn’d
The heav’nly gifts, the work of Vulcan’s hand.
First on his legs the well-wrought greaves he fix’d,
Fasten’d with silver clasps; his breastplate next
Around his chest; and o’er his shoulders flung
His silver-studded sword, with blade of brass;
Then took his vast and weighty shield, whence gleam’d
A light refulgent as the full-orb’d moon;
Or as to seamen o’er the wave is borne
The watchfire’s light, which, high among the hills,
Some shepherd kindles in his lonely fold:
As they, reluctant, by the stormy winds,
Far from their friends are o’er the waters driv’n;
So from Achilles’ shield, bright, richly wrought,
The light was thrown. The weighty helm he rais’d,
And plac’d it on his head; the plumed helm
Shone like a star; and wav’d the hairs of gold.
Thick-set by Vulcan in the gleaming crest.
Then all the arms Achilles prov’d, to know
If well they fitted to his graceful limbs:
Like wings, they seem’d to lift him from the ground.
Last, from its case he drew his father’s spear,
Long, pond’rous, tough; not one of all the Greeks,
None, save Achilles’ self, could poise that spear;
The far-fam’d Pelian ash, which to his sire,
On Pelion’s summit fell’d, to be the bane
Of mighty chiefs, the Centaur Chiron gave.
With care Automedon and Alcimus
The horses yok’d, with collars fair attach’d:
Plac’d in their mouths the bits, and pass’d the reins
Back to the well-built car: Automedon
Sprang on the car, with shining lash in hand:
Behind, Achilles came, array’d for war,
In arms all glitt’ring as the gorgeous sun,
And loudly to his father’s steeds he call’d:
“Xanthus and Balius, noble progeny
Of swift Podarge, now in other sort
Back to the Grecian ranks in safety bear,
When he shall quit the field, your charioteer;
Nor leave him, as ye left Patroclus, slain.”

To whom in answer from beneath the yoke
Xanthus, the noble horse, with glancing feet:
Bowing his head the while, till all his mane
Down from th’ yokeband streaming, reach’d the ground;
By Juno, white-arm’d Queen, with speech endued:

“Yes, great Achilles, we this day again
Will bear thee safely; but thy day of doom
Is nigh at hand; nor we shall cause thy death,
But Heav’n’s high will, and Fate’s imperious pow’r.
By no default of ours, nor lack of speed,
The Trojans stripp’d Patroclus of his arms:
The mighty God, fair-hair’d Latona’s son,
Achiev’d his death, and Hector’s vict’ry gain’d.
Our speed of foot may vie with Zephyr’s breeze,
Deem’d swiftest of the winds; but thou art doom’d
To die, by force combin’d of God and man.”

He said; his farther speech the Furies stay’d.
To whom in wrath Achilles swift of foot;
“Xanthus, why thus predict my coming fate?
It ill beseems thee! well I know myself
That I am fated here in Troy to die,
Far from my home and parents; yet withal
I cease not, till these Trojans from the field
Before me fly.” He said, and to the front,
His war-cry shouting, urg’d his fiery steeds.



ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.


Jupiter, upon Achilles’ return to the battle, calls a council of the
gods and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the combat
described when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Æneas to
meet Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes encounter;
but Æneas is preserved by the assistance of Neptune. Achilles falls
upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon the point of killing Hector,
but Apollo conveys him away in a cloud. Achilles pursues the Trojans
with a great slaughter.

The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy.

BOOK XX.

Round thee, Achilles, eager for the fray,
Stood thus accoutred, by their beaked ships,
The sons of Greece; the Trojan host, oppos’d,
Stood on the sloping margin of the plain.
Then Jove to Themis gave command to call
The Gods to council from the lofty height
Of many-ridg’d Olympus; to the house
Of Jove she summon’d them from ev’ry side.
Thence of the Rivers, save Oceanus,
Not one was absent; nor of Nymphs, who haunt
Clear fount, or shady grove, or grassy mead.
They, at the Cloud-compeller’s house arriv’d,
Within the polish’d corridor reclin’d,
Which Vulcan’s cunning hand for Jove had built.
There were they gather’d in th’ abode of Jove:
Nor did th’ Earth-shaking Neptune slight the call,
But came from ocean’s depths, and in the midst
He sat, and thus the will of Jove enquir’d:

“Why, Lord of lightning, hast thou summon’d here
The Gods to council? dost thou aught devise
Touching the Greeks and Trojans? who e’en now
Kindle anew, it seems, the blaze of war.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller, answ’ring, thus:
“The purpose, Neptune, well thou know’st thyself
For which I call’d ye; true, they needs must die,
But still they claim my care; yet here will I
Upon Olympus’ lofty ridge remain,
And view, serene, the combat; you, the rest,
Go, as you list, to Trojans or to Greeks,
And at your pleasure either party aid.
For if we leave Achilles thus alone
To fight against the Trojans, not an hour
Will they before the son of Peleus stand.
They dreaded him before; but now, I fear,
Since rous’d to fury by his comrade’s death,
He e’en in fate’s despite may storm the wall.”

Thus Saturn’s son, and quenchless battle rous’d:
The Gods, divided, hasten’d to the war:
Juno and Pallas to the ships of Greece,
With them th’ Earth-shaker, and the helpful God,
Hermes, for cunning subtleties unmatch’d;
And Vulcan too, exulting in his strength,
Yet halting, and on feeble limbs sustain’d.
Mars of the glancing helm took part with Troy,
And golden Phoebus with his locks unshorn,
Latona too, and Dian, Archer-Queen,
Xanthus, and Venus, laughter-loving dame.

While from the fight of men the Gods abstain’d,
High rose the Grecian vaunts, as, long withdrawn,
Achilles on the field again appear’d:
And ev’ry Trojan’s limbs with terror quak’d,
Trembling, as Peleus’ godlike son they saw,
In arms all-glitt’ring, fierce as blood-stain’d Mars.
But when th’ Immortals mingled in the throng,
Then furious wax’d the spirit-stirring strife;
Then Pallas rais’d her war-cry, standing now
Beside the deep-dug trench, without the wall,
Now shouting loud along the sounding beach.
On th’ other side, as with the tempest’s roar,
Mars to the Trojans shouted loud; one while
From Ilium’s topmost height; anon again
From the fair hill, o’erhanging Simois’ stream.
Thus, either side exciting to the fray,
Th’ immortal Gods unchain’d the angry war.
Thunder’d on high the Sire of Gods and men
With awful din; while Neptune shook beneath
The boundless earth, and lofty mountain tops.
The spring-abounding Ida quak’d and rock’d
From her firm basis to her loftiest peak,
And Troy’s proud city, and the ships of Greece.
Pluto, th’ infernal monarch, heard alarm’d,
And, springing from his throne, cried out in fear,
Lest Neptune, breaking through the solid earth,
To mortals and Immortals should lay bare
His dark and drear abode, of Gods abhorr’d.
Such was the shock when Gods in battle met;
For there to royal Neptune stood oppos’d
Phoebus Apollo with his arrows keen;
The blue-ey’d Pallas to the God of War;
To Juno, Dian, heav’nly Archeress,
Sister of Phoebus, golden-shafted Queen.
Stout Hermes, helpful God, Latona fac’d;
While Vulcan met the mighty rolling stream,
Xanthus by Gods, by men Scamander call’d.
Thus Gods encounter’d Gods: Achilles’ soul
Meantime was burning ’mid the throng to meet
Hector, the son of Priam; with whose blood
He long’d to glut th’ insatiate Lord of War.
Apollo then, the spirit-stirring God,
Æneas mov’d Achilles to confront,
And fill’d with courage high; and thus, the voice
Assuming of Lycaon, Priam’s son,
Apollo, son of Jove, the chief address’d:

“Æneas, prince and councillor of Troy,
Where are the vaunts, which o’er the wine-cup late
Thou mad’st amid th’ assembled chiefs of Troy,
That hand to hand thou wouldst Achilles meet?”

To whom Æneas thus in answer spoke:
“Why, son of Priam, urge me to contend,
Against my will, with Peleus’ mighty son?
Not for the first time should I now engage
Achilles swift of foot: I met him once,
And fled before his spear, on Ida’s hill,
When on our herds he fell; Lyrnessus then
He raz’d, and Pedasus; me Jove preserv’d,
With strength, endowing, and with speed of foot.
Else had I fall’n beneath Achilles’ hand,
By Pallas aided; who before him moves,
Light of his life, and guides his brazen spear
Trojans and Leleges alike to slay.
’Tis not in mortal man with him to fight,
Whom still some God attends, and guards from harm;
And, e’en unaided, to the mark his spear
Unerring flies, uncheck’d until it pierce
A warrior’s breast; yet if the Gods the scale
Impartial held, all brass-clad as he is,
O’er me no easy triumph should he gain.”

To whom the King Apollo, son of Jove:
“Brave chief, do thou too to th’ immortal Gods
Address thy pray’r; men say that thou art sprung
From Venus, child of Jove; his mother owns
A humbler origin; one born to Jove,
The other to the aged Ocean God.
On then with dauntless spear, nor be dismay’d
By his high tone and vaunting menaces.”

His words with courage fill’d the hero’s breast,
And on he sprang, in dazzling arms arrayed;
But not unmark’d of white-arm’d Juno pass’d,
To meet Achilles, through the press of men,
Who thus address’d the Gods, to council call’d:

“Neptune and Pallas both, bethink ye well
What now should be our course; Æneas comes,
In dazzling arms array’d, to meet in fight
The son of Peleus; Phoebus sends him forth.
Say, then, shall we, encount’ring, to retreat
Perforce constrain him? or shall one of us
Beside Achilles stand, and give him strength
That he may nothing lack; and know himself
By all the mightiest of th’ immortal Gods
Belov’d, and those how pow’rless, by whose aid
The Trojans yet maintain defensive war?
Therefore, to join the battle, came we all
From high Olympus, that in this day’s fight
No ill befall him; though the time shall come
For him to meet the doom, by fate decreed,
When at his birth his thread of life was spun.
But if Achilles from a voice divine
Receive not this assurance, he may well
Be struck with fear, if haply to some God
He find himself oppos’d: ’tis hard for man
To meet, in presence visible, a God.”

To whom Earth-shaking Neptune thus replied:
“Juno, thine anger carry not too far;
It ill beseems thee. Not with my consent
Shall we, the stronger far, provoke to arms
The other Gods; but rather, from the field
Retiring, let us from on high survey,
To mortals left, the turmoil of the war.
Should Mars or Phoebus then begin the fight,
Or stay Achilles, and his arm restrain,
Then in the contest we too may engage;
And soon, methinks, will they be fain to join,
Driv’n from the field, the Synod of the Gods,
Subdued perforce by our victorious hands.”

The dark-hair’d monarch spoke; and led the way
To the high wall, by Trojans built of old,
With Pallas’ aid, for godlike Hercules;
Within whose circle he might safety seek,
When from the beach the monster of the deep
Might chase him toward the plain; there Neptune sat,
And with him, the other Gods, a veil of cloud
Impenetrable around their shoulders spread.
On th’ other side, upon the fair hill’s brow,
Phoebus with Mars the fort-destroyer sat.
On either side they sat, each facing each
With hostile counsels; yet reluctant both
To take th’ initiative of ruthless war;
Till Jove, enthron’d on high, the signal gave.
Then all the plain, with men and horses throng’d,
The brazen gleam illumin’d; rang the earth
Beneath their feet, as to the battle-shock
They rush’d; but in the midst, both hosts between,
Eager for fight, stood forth two warriors bold,
Proudly pre-eminent; Anchises’ son
Æneas, and Achilles’ godlike might.

Æneas first with threat’ning mien advanc’d,
Nodding his pond’rous helm; before his breast
His shield he bore, and pois’d his brazen spear.
Him met Achilles from th’ opposing ranks;
Fierce as a rav’ning lion, whom to slay
Pour forth the stalwart youths, th’ united strength
Of the rous’d village; he unheeding moves
At first; but wounded by a jav’lin thrown
By some bold youth, he turns, with gaping jaws,
And frothing fangs, collecting for the spring,
His breast too narrow for his mighty heart;
And with his tail he lashes both his flanks
And sides, as though to rouse his utmost rage;
Then on, in pride of strength, with glaring eyes
He dashes, if some hunter he may slay,
Or in the foremost rank himself be slain.
So mov’d his dauntless spirit Peleus’ son
Æneas to confront; when near they came,
Thus first Achilles, swift of foot, began:

“Æneas, why so far before the ranks
Advanc’d? dost thou presume with me to fight?
Perchance expecting that the throne of Troy
And Priam’s royal honours may be thine.
E’en if thou slay me, deem not to obtain
Such boon from Priam; valiant sons are his,
And he not weak, but bears a constant mind.
Or have the Trojans set apart for thee
Some favour’d spot, the fairest of the land,
Orchard or corn-land, shouldst thou work my death;
Which thou shalt find, I trust, too hard a task?
Already hast thou fled before my spear;
Hast thou forgotten how amid thy herds
Alone I found thee, and with flying foot
Pursued thee down the steep of Ida’s hill?
Nor didst thou dare to turn, or pause in flight.
Thou to Lyrnessus fledd’st; Lyrnessus I,
With Pallas’ aid and Jove’s, assail’d and took:
Their women thence, their days of freedom lost,
I bore away, my captives; thee from death,
Jove and the other Gods defended then;
But will not now bestow, though such thy hope,
Their succour; then I warn thee, while ’tis time,
Ere ill betide thee, to the gen’ral throng
That thou withdraw, nor stand to me oppos’d:
After th’ event may e’en a fool be wise.”

To whom in answer thus Æneas spoke:
“Achilles, think not me, as though a fool,
To daunt with lofty speech; I too could well
With cutting words, and insult, answer thee.
Each other’s race and parents well we know
From tales of ancient days; although by sight
Nor mine to thee, nor thine to me are known.
To noble Peleus thou, ’tis said, wast born
Of Thetis, fair-hair’d daughter of the sea;
Of great Anchises, Heav’n-descended chief,
I boast me sprung, to him by Venus borne.
Of these shall one or other have this day
To mourn their son; since not with empty words
Shall thou and I from mortal combat part.
But if thou farther wouldst enquire, and learn
The race I spring from, not unknown to men,
By Dardanus, of cloud-compelling Jove
Begotten, was Dardania peopled first,
Ere sacred Ilium, populous city of men,
Was founded on the plain; as yet they dwelt
On spring-abounding Ida’s lowest spurs.
To Dardanus was Erichthonius born,
Great King, the wealthiest of the sons of men;
For him were pastur’d in the marshy mead,
Rejoicing with their foals, three thousand mares;
Them Boreas, in the pasture where they fed,
Beheld, enamour’d; and amid the herd
In likeness of a coal-black steed appear’d;
Twelve foals, by him conceiving, they produc’d.
These, o’er the teeming corn-fields as they flew,
Skimm’d o’er the standing ears, nor broke the haulm;
And, o’er wide Ocean’s bosom as they flew,
Skimm’d o’er the topmost spray of th’ hoary sea
Again, to Erichthonius Tros was born,
The King of Troy; three noble sons were his,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede;
The fairest he of all the sons of men;
Him, for his beauty, bore the Gods away,
To minister as cup-bearer to Jove,
And dwell amid th’ Immortals: Ilus next
Begot a noble son, Laomedon;
Tithonus he, and Priam; Clytius,
Lampus and Icetaon, plant of Mars;
Capys, begotten of Assaracus,
Begot Anchises, and Anchises me:
To Priam godlike Hector owes his birth.
Such is my race, and such the blood I boast;
But Jove, at will, to mortals valour gives
Or minishes; for he is Lord of all.
Then cease we now, like babbling fools, to prate
Here in the centre of the coming fight.
Terms of reproach we both might find, whose weight
Would sink a galley of a hundred oars;
For glibly runs the tongue, and can at will
Give utt’rance to discourse in ev’ry vein;
Wide is the range of language; and such words
As one may speak, another may return.
What need that we should insults interchange?
Like women, who some paltry quarrel wage,
Scolding and brawling in the public street,
And in opprobrious terms their anger vent,
Some true, some false; for so their rage suggests.
With words thou shalt not turn me from the field,
Till we have met in arms; then try we now
Each other’s prowess with our brazen spears.”

He said, and hurl’d against the mighty shield
His brazen spear; loud rang the weapon’s point;
And at arm’s length Achilles held the shield
With his broad hand, in fear that through its folds
Æneas’ spear would easy passage find;
Blind fool! forgetful that the glorious gifts
Bestow’d by Gods, are not with ease o’ercome,
Nor yield before th’ assaults of mortal men.

So broke not through Æneas’ sturdy spear,
Stay’d by the golden plate, the gift of Heav’n;
Yet through two plates it pass’d, but three remain’d,
For five were in the shield by Vulcan wrought;
Two were of brass, the inner two of tin,
And one of gold, which stay’d the brazen spear.

Achilles threw in turn his pond’rous spear.
And struck the circle of Æneas’ shield
Near the first rim, where thinnest lay the brass,
And thinnest too th’ o’erlying hide; right through
The Pelian shaft was driv’n; wide gap’d the shield.
Æneas crouch’d, in fear, as o’er his head
He held his shield; the eager weapon pass’d
Through both the circles of his ample shield,
And in the ground, behind him, quiv’ring, stood.
Escap’d the pond’rous weapon, sharpest pain
Flashing across his eyes, in fear he stood,
So close the spear had pass’d him; onward then,
Drawing his trenchant blade, Achilles rush’d,
With fearful shout; a rocky fragment then
Æneas lifted up, a mighty mass,
Which scarce two men, as men are now, could bear,
But he, unaided, lifted it with ease.
Then had Æneas, with the massive stone,
Or on the helmet, or the shield, his death
Averting, struck Achilles; and himself
Had by the sword of Peleus’ son been slain,
Had not th’ Earth-shaking God his peril seen,
And to th’ Immortals thus address’d his speech:
“Oh, woe is me for great Æneas’ sake,
Who, by Achilles slain, must visit soon
The viewless shades; insensate, who relied
On Phoebus’ words; yet nought shall he avail
From death to save him. Yet oh why should he,
Blameless himself, the guilt of others rue?
Who still his grateful sacrifice hath paid
To all the Gods in wide-spread Heav’n who dwell.
Let us then interpose to guard his life;
Lest, if Achilles slay him, Saturn’s son
Be mov’d to anger; for his destiny
Would have him live; lest, heirless, from the earth
Should perish quite the race of Dardanus;
By Saturn’s son the best-belov’d of all
His sons, to him by mortal women born.
For Jove the race of Priam hath abhorr’d;
But o’er the Trojans shall Æneas reign,
And his sons’ sons, through ages yet unborn.”

Whom answer’d thus the stag-ey’d Queen of Heav’n:
“Neptune, do thou determine for thyself
Æneas to withdraw, or leave to fall,
Good as he is, beneath Achilles’ sword;
But we before th’ immortal Gods are bound,
Both I and Pallas, by repeated oaths,
Ne’er from his doom one Trojan life to save,
Though to devouring flames a prey, all Troy
Were blazing, kindled by the valiant Greeks.”

Th’ Earth-shaker heard; and thro’ the fight he pass’d,
And through the throng of spears, until he came
Where great Achilles and Æneas stood.
Around the eyes of Peleus’ son he spread
A veil of mist; then from Æneas’ shield
The brass-tipp’d spear withdrawing, laid it down
Before Achilles’ feet; and lifting up
Æneas, bore him high above the ground.
O’er many a rank of warriors and of cars
Æneas flew, supported by the God;
Till to the field’s extremest verge he came,
Where stood the Caucons, arming for the war.
There to Æneas, standing by his side,
Th’ Earth-shaker thus his winged words address’d:
“Æneas, say what God has mov’d thee thus
Against Achilles, reckless, to contend,
Thy stronger far, and dearer to the Gods?
If e’er he cross thy path, do thou retire,
Lest, e’en despite of fate, thou find thy death.
But when Achilles hath to fate succumb’d,
Then, fearless, with the foremost join the fray:
No other Greek shall bear away thy spoils.”

Thus plainly warn’d, Æneas there he left.
Then from Achilles’ eyes he purg’d the film:
Astonish’d, he with eyes wide open gaz’d,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“O Heav’n, what marvel do mine eyes behold?
My spear before me laid, and vanish’d he
At whom I hurl’d it with intent to slay!
Then is Æneas of th’ immortal Gods
In truth belov’d, though vain I deem’d his boast.
A curse go with him! yet methinks not soon
Will he again presume to prove my might,
Who gladly now in flight escapes from death.
Then, to the valiant Greeks my orders giv’n.
Let me some other Trojan’s mettle prove.”
Then tow’rd the ranks he sprang, each sev’ral man
Exhorting: “From the Trojans, valiant Greeks,
No longer stand aloof; but man to man
Confront the foe, and nobly dare the fight.
’Twere hard for me, brave warrior though I be,
To face such numbers, and to fight with all:
Not Mars, nor Pallas, though immortal Gods,
Could face, and vanquish, such a mighty mass.
But what my single arm, and feet, and strength
May profit, not a jot will I relax;
Right through the ranks I mean to force my way;
And small shall be that Trojan’s cause for joy,
Who comes within the compass of my spear.”

Thus he, exhorting; Hector cheering on
Meanwhile the Trojans, with assurance giv’n
That he himself Achilles would confront.

“Ye valiant Trojans, fear not Peleus’ son;
I too in words could with the Gods contend,
Though not in arms; so much the stronger they.
Not all his words Achilles shall make good;
Fulfilling some, in others he shall fail,
His course midway arrested. Him will I
Encounter, though his hands were hands of fire,
Of fire his hands, his strength as burnish’d steel.”

Thus he, exhorting; with uplifted spears
Advanc’d the Trojans; from the mingling hosts
Loud rose the clamour; then at Hector’s side
Apollo stood, and thus address’d the chief:
“Hector, forbear Achilles to defy;
And ’mid the crowd withdraw thee from the fray;
Lest with the spear he slay thee, thrown from far,
Or with the sword in combat hand to hand.”

He said; and troubled by the heav’nly voice,
Hector amid the throng of men withdrew.

Then, girt with might, amid the Trojans sprang,
With fearful shouts, Achilles; first he slew
Otryntes’ son, Iphition, valiant chief
Of num’rous warriors; him a Naiad nymph,
In Hyde’s fertile vale, beneath the feet
Of snow-clad Tmolus, to Otryntes bore;
At him, as on he rush’d, Achilles hurl’d,
And through his forehead drove his glitt’ring spear;
The head was cleft in twain; thund’ring he fell,
And o’er him thus Achilles made his boast:

“Son of Otryntes, lie thou there, of men
The most vain-glorious; here thou find’st thy death,
Far from thy place of birth, beside the lake
Gygaean; there hadst thou thine heritage
Of old, beside the fish-abounding stream
Of Hyllus, and by Hermus’ eddying flood.”

Thus he, exulting: o’er Iphition’s eyes
Were spread the shades of death; his mangled corpse
Was crush’d beneath the Grecian chariot wheels,
In the first shock. Demoleon next he smote,
A helpful aid in war, Antenor’s son,
Pierc’d thro’ the temples, thro’ the brass-bound helm;
Nor check’d the brazen helm the spear, whose point
Went crashing through the bone, that all the brain
Was shatter’d; onward as he rush’d, he fell.
Then through the neck Hippodamas he smote,
Flying before him, mounted on his car.
Deep groan’d he, breathing out his soul, as groans
A bull, by sturdy youths to th’ altar dragg’d
Of Neptune, King divine of Helice;
Th’ Earth-shaking God, well pleas’d, the gift receives;
E’en with such groans his noble spirit fled.
The godlike Polydore he next assail’d,
The son of Priam; him his aged sire
Would fain have kept at home, of all his sons
At once the youngest and the best-belov’d;
Among them all for speed of foot unmatch’d;
Whose youthful folly, in the foremost ranks
His speed displaying, cost him now his life.
Him, as he darted by, Achilles’ spear
Struck through the centre of the back, where met
The golden clasps that held the glitt’ring belt,
And where the breastplate form’d a double guard:
Right through his body pass’d the weapon’s point;
Groaning, he fell upon his knees; dark clouds
O’erspread his eyes; supporting with his hand
His wounded bowels, on the ground he writh’d.
When Hector saw his brother Polydore
Writhing in death, a mist o’erspread his eyes
Nor longer could he bear to stand aloof,
But sprang to meet Achilles, flashing fire,
His keen spear brandishing; at sight of him
Up leap’d Achilles, and exulting cried:

“Lo, here the man who most hath wrung my soul,
Who slew my lov’d companion: now, methinks,
Upon the pass of war not long shall we
Stand separate, nor each the other shun.”

Then, with stern glance, to godlike Hector thus:
“Draw near, and quickly meet thy doom of death.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
Unterrified: “Achilles, think not me,
As though a fool and ignorant of war,
To daunt with lofty speech; I too could well
With cutting words and insult answer thee.
I know thee strong and valiant; and I know
Myself to thee inferior; but th’ event
Is with the Gods; and I, if such their will,
The weaker, with my spear may reach thy life:
My point too hath, ere now, its sharpness prov’d.”

He said, and, poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear,
Which from Achilles Pallas turn’d aside
With lightest breath; and back to Hector sent,
And laid before his feet; intent to slay,
Onward Achilles rush’d, with fearful shout;
But Phoebus Hector from the field convey’d,
(As Gods can only,) veil’d in thickest cloud.
Thrice Peleus’ godlike son, with brazen spear,
His onset made; thrice struck the misty cloud;
But when, with pow’r as of a God, he made
His fourth essay, in fury thus he cried:

“Yet once again, vile hound, hast thou escap’d;
Thy doom was nigh, but thee thy God hath sav’d,
Phoebus, to whom, amid the clash of spears,
Well mayst thou pray! We yet shall meet again;
When I shall end thee, if a guardian God
I too may claim; meanwhile, from thee I turn,
And others seek on whom my hap may light.”

He said, and drove through Dryops’ neck his spear,
And stretch’d him at his feet, and pass’d him by.
Next with his spear he struck below the knee
Philetor’s son, Demuchus, stout and tall,
And check’d his forward course; then rushing on
Dealt with his mighty sword the mortal blow.
The sons of Bias next, Laogonus
And Dardanus, he hurl’d from off their car,
One with the spear, and one by sword-stroke slain.
Tros too he slew, Alastor’s son, who came
To meet him, and embrace his knees, and pray
To spare his life, in pity of his youth:
Little he knew how vain would be his pray’r;
For not of temper soft, nor mild of mood
Was he, but sternly fierce; and as he knelt
And clasp’d his knees, and would his pray’r prefer,
Achilles clove him with his mighty sword,
Gash’d through the liver; as from out the wound
His liver dropp’d, the dark blood gushing forth
His bosom fill’d, and darkness clos’d his eyes,
As ebb’d his life away. Then through the ear
Mulius he thrust; at th’ other ear came forth
The brazen point. Echeclus next he met,
Son of Agenor, and his hilted sword
Full on the centre of his head let fall.
The hot blood dy’d the blade; the darkling shades
Of death, and rig’rous fate, his eyes o’erspread.
Next, where the tendons bind the elbow-joint,
The brazen spear transfix’d Deucalion’s arm;
With death in prospect, and disabled arm
He stood, till on his neck Achilles’ sword
Descending, shar’d, and flung afar, both head
And helmet; from the spine’s dissever’d joints
The marrow flow’d, as stretch’d in dust he lay.
The noble son of Peireus next he slew,
Rigmus, who came from Thracia’s fertile plains;
Him through the waist he struck, the brazen spear
Plung’d in his bowels; from the car he fell;
And as Areithous, his charioteer,
His horses turn’d, Achilles through the neck
His sharp spear thrusting, hurl’d him to the ground,
The startled steeds in wild confusion thrown.

As rage the fires amid the wooded glen
Of some parch’d mountain’s side, and fiercely burns
The copse-wood dry, while eddying here and there
The flames are whirl’d before the gusty wind;
So fierce Achilles raged, on ev’ry side
Pursuing, slaught’ring; reek’d the earth with blood.
As when upon a well-roll’d threshing-floor,
Two sturdy-fronted steers, together yok’d,
Tread the white barley out; beneath their feet
Fast flies the grain out-trodden from the husk;
So by Achilles driv’n, his flying steeds
His chariot bore, o’er bodies of the slain
And broken bucklers trampling; all beneath
Was plash’d with blood the axle, and the rails
Around the car, as from the horses’ feet
And from the felloes of the wheels were thrown
The bloody gouts; and onward still he press’d,
Panting for added triumphs, deeply dyed
With gore and carnage his unconquer’d hands.



ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.


The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the
river Scamander; he falls upon the latter with great slaughter, takes
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and
kills Lycaon and Asteropaeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves;
Neptune and Pallas assist the hero; Simois joins Scamander; at length
Vulcan, by the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This
combat ended, the other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles
continues the slaughter, and drives the rest into Troy; Agenor only
makes a stand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo: who (to
delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor’s shape, and while he pursues
him in that disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into
their city.

The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream of
Scamander.

BOOK XXI.

But when they came to eddying Xanthus’ ford,
Fair-flowing stream, born of immortal Jove,
Achilles cut in twain the flying host;
Part driving tow’rd the city, o’er the plain,
Where on the former day the routed Greeks,
When Hector rag’d victorious, fled amain.
On, terror-struck, they rush’d; but Juno spread,
To baffle their retreat, before their path,
Clouds and thick darkness: half the fugitives
In the deep river’s silv’ry eddies plung’d:
With clamour loud they fell: the torrent roar’d;
The banks around re-echoed; here and there,
They, with the eddies wildly struggling, swam.
As when, pursued by fire, a hov’ring swarm
Of locusts riverward direct their flight,
And, as th’ insatiate flames advance, they cow’r
Amid the waters; so a mingled mass
Of men and horses, by Achilles driv’n,
The deeply-whirling stream, of Xanthus chok’d.
His spear amid the tamarisks on the bank
The hero left; on savage deeds intent,
Arm’d with his sword alone, a God in pow’r,
He sprang amid the torrent; right and left
He smote; then fearful rose the groans of men
Slain with the sword; the stream ran red with blood.
As fishes, flying from a dolphin, crowd
The shoal recesses of some open bay,
In fear, for whom he catches he devours;
So crouch’d the Trojans in the mighty stream
Beneath the banks; and when at length his hand
Wearied of slaughter, from the stream, alive,
He dragg’d twelve youths, whose forfeit lives should be
The bloody fine for slain Patroclus paid.
Helpless from fear, as fawns, he brought them forth;
Their hands secur’d behind them with the belts
Which o’er their shirts of twisted mail they wore,
And bade his comrades lead them to the ships.
Then on again he dash’d, athirst for blood;
And first encounter’d, flying from the stream,
Lycaon, Priam’s son; him once before
He by a nightly onslaught had surpris’d,
And from his father’s vineyard captive borne:
Where, as he cut, to form his chariot rail,
A fig-tree’s tender shoots, unlook’d-for ill
O’ertook him in the form of Peleus’ son.
Thence in his ship to Lemnos’ thriving isle
He bore him, ransom’d there by Jason’s son.
His Imbrian host, Eetion, set him free
With lib’ral gifts, and to Arisba sent:
Escaping thence, he reach’d his native home.
Twelve days save one, rejoicing, with his friends
He spent, return’d from Lemnos: fate, the twelfth,
Again consign’d him to Achilles’ hands,
From him, reluctant, to receive his death.
Him when Achilles, swift of foot, beheld,
No spear in hand, of helm and shield bereft,
All flung in haste away, as from the stream,
Reeking with sweat, and faint with toil, he fled,
He commun’d, wrathful, with his mighty heart:

“Ye Gods, what marvel do mine eyes behold!
Methinks the valiant Trojans slain by me
Ere long will from the realms of darkness rise;
Since, death escaping, but to slav’ry sold
In Lemnos’ isle, this fellow hath return’d,
Despite the hoary sea’s impediment,
Which many a man against his will hath stay’d:
Now shall he taste my spear, that I may see
If thence too he return, or if the earth
May keep him safe, which e’en the strongest holds.”

Thus, as he stood, he mus’d; but all aghast
Approach’d Lycaon; and would fain have clasp’d
The Hero’s knees; for longingly he sought
Escape from bitter death and evil fate.
Achilles rais’d his spear, in act to strike;
He, stooping, ran beneath, and clasp’d his knees;
Above his back the murd’rous weapon pass’d,
And in the earth was fix’d: one suppliant hand
Achilles’ knees embrac’d; the other held,
With unrelaxing grasp, the pointed spear;
As he with winged words, imploring, spoke:

“I clasp thy knees, Achilles! look then down
With pity on my woes; and recognize,
Illustrious chief, a suppliant’s sacred claim:
For in thy tent I first broke bread, that day,
When, in my father’s fruitful vineyard seiz’d,
Thy captive I became, to slav’ry sold,
Far from my sire and friends, in Lemnos’ isle.
A hundred oxen were my ransom then;
At thrice so much I now would buy my life.
This day is but the twelfth, since, sorely tried
By lengthen’d suffering, back to Troy I came.
Now to thy hands once more my cruel fate
Consigns me; surely by the wrath of Jove
Pursued, who gives me to thy pow’r again.
Me, doom’d to early death, my mother bore,
Old Altes’ daughter, fair Laothoe;
Altes, who rul’d the warlike Leleges,
In lofty Pedasus, by Satnois’ stream.
His child of Priam’s many wives was one;
Two sons she bore, and both by thee must die.
Already one, the godlike Polydore,
Amid the foremost ranks thy spear hath slain;
And now my doom hath found me; for from thee,
Since evil fate hath plac’d me in thy hands,
I may not hope to fly; yet hear but this,
And weigh it in thy mind, to spare my life:
I come not of that womb which Hector bore,
Who slew thy comrade, gentle, kind, and brave.”

Thus Priam’s noble son, imploring, spoke;
But stern the answer fell upon his ear:

“Thou fool! no more to me of ransom prate!
Before Patroclus met the doom of death,
To spare the Trojans still my soul inclin’d;
And many captives, ta’en alive, I sold;
But from henceforth, before the walls of Troy,
Not one of all the Trojans, whom the Gods
May to my hands deliver, least of all
A son of Priam, shall escape the death.
Thou too, my friend, must die: why vainly wail?
Dead is Patroclus too, thy better far.
Me too thou see’st, how stalwart, tall, and fair,
Of noble sire, and Goddess-mother born:
Yet must I yield to death and stubborn fate,
Whene’er, at morn, or noon, or eve, the spear
Or arrow from the bow may reach my life.”

He said; and sank Lycaon’s limbs and heart;
He loos’d the spear, and sat, with both his hands
Uprais’d, imploring; but Achilles drew,
And on his neck beside the collar-bone
Let fall his trenchant sword; the two-edg’d blade
Was buried deep; prone on the earth he lay;
Forth gush’d the crimson blood, and dyed the ground.

Him, dragging by the feet, Achilles threw
In the mid stream, and thus with vaunting speech:

“Lie there amid the fishes, who shall cleanse,
But not with kindly thought, thy gory wounds:
O’er thee, extended on thy bier, shall rise
No mother’s wail; Scamander’s eddying stream
Shall to the sea’s broad bosom roll thee down;
And, springing through the darkly rippling wave,
Fishes shall rise, and banquet on thy flesh.
On now the work of death! till, flying ye,
And slaught’ring I, we reach the city wall.
Nor this fair-flowing, silver-eddying stream,
Shall aught avail ye, though to him ye pay
In sacrifice the blood of countless bulls,
And living horses in his waters sink.
Ye all shall perish, till Patroclus’ death
Be fully aveng’d, and slaughter of the Greeks,
Whom, in my absence, by the ships ye slew.”
He said: the mighty River at his words
Indignant chaf’d, and ponder’d in his mind
How best to check Achilles’ warlike toil,
And from destruction guard the Trojan host.

Meantime Achilles with his pond’rous spear
Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon,
Assail’d with deadly purpose; Pelegon
To broadly-flowing Axius ow’d his birth,
The River-God commingling with the blood
Of Periboea, daughter eldest born
Of Acessamenus: on him he sprang;
He, from the river rising, stood oppos’d.
Two lances in his hand; his courage rous’d
By Xanthus, who, indignant, saw his stream
Polluted by the blood of slaughter’d youths,
By fierce Achilles’ hand, unpitying, slain.
When near the warriors, each to other, came,
Achilles, swift of foot, took up the word:
“What man, and whence art thou, who dar’st to stand
Oppos’d to me? of most unhappy sires
The children they, who my encounter meet!”

To whom th’ illustrious son of Pelegon:
“Great son of Peleus, why enquire my race?
From far Paeonia’s fertile fields I come,
The leader of the long-spear’d Paeon host.
Ten days have pass’d since I to Ilium came.
From widely-flowing Axius my descent,
Axius, the purest stream on earth that flows.
He Pelegon begot, the spear-renown’d;
Of Pelegon I boast me sprung; and now
Address thee, brave Achilles, to the fight.”

Threat’ning he spoke: Achilles rais’d on high
The Pelian spear; but, ambidexter, he
From either hand at once a jav’lin launch’d.
One struck, but pierc’d not through, the mighty shield,
Stay’d by the golden plate, the gift of Heav’n;
Achilles’ right fore-arm the other graz’d:
Forth gush’d the crimson blood; but, glancing by
And vainly longing for the taste of flesh,
The point behind him in the earth was fix’d.
Then at Asteropaeus in his turn
With deadly intent the son of Peleus threw
His straight-directed spear; his mark he miss’d,
But struck the lofty bank, where, deep infix’d
To half its length, the Pelian ash remain’d.
Then from beside his thigh Achilles drew
His trenchant blade, and, furious, onward rush’d;
While from the cliff Asteropaeus strove
In vain, with stalwart hand, to wrench the spear.
Three times he shook it with impetuous force,
Three times relax’d his grasp; a fourth attempt
He made to bend and break the sturdy shaft;
But him, preventing, Peleus’ godlike son
With deadly stroke across the belly smote,
And gush’d his bowels forth; upon the ground
Gasping he lay, and darkness seal’d his eyes.
Then on his breast Achilles sprang, and stripp’d
His armour off, and thus with vaunting speech:
“So lie thou there! ’tis hard for thee to fight,
Though river-born, against the progeny
Of mighty Jove; a widely-flowing stream
Thou claim’st as author of thy parentage;
My high descent from Jove himself I boast.
My father Peleus, son of Æacus,
Reigns o’er the num’rous race of Myrmidons;
The son of Jove himself was Æacus.
High o’er all rivers, that to th’ ocean flow,
Is Jove exalted; and in like degree
Superior is his race in pow’r to theirs.
A mighty River hast thou here at hand,
If that might aught avail thee; but his pow’r
Is impotent to strive with Saturn’s son.
With him, not Achelous, King of streams,
Presumes to vie; nor e’en the mighty strength
Of deeply-flowing, wide Oceanus;
From whom all rivers, all the boundless sea,
All fountains, all deep wells derive their source;
Yet him appals the lightning bolt of Jove,
And thunder, pealing from the vault of Heav’n.”
He said, and from the cliff withdrew his spear.
Him left he lifeless there upon the sand
Extended; o’er him the dark waters wash’d,
And eels and fishes, thronging, gnaw’d his flesh.
Then ’mid the Paeons’ plumed host he rush’d,
Who fled along the eddying stream, when him,
Their bravest in the stubborn fight, they saw
Slain by the sword and arm of Peleus’ son.
Thersilochus and Mydon then he slew,
Mnesus and Thrasius and Astypylus,
Ænius and Ophelestes; and yet more
Had been the slaughter by Achilles wrought,
But from his eddying depths, in human form,
With wrathful tone the mighty River spoke:

“In strength, Achilles, and in deeds of arms,
All mortals thou surpassest; for the Gods
Themselves attend thee, and protect from harm;
If Saturn’s son have given thee utterly
The Trojans to destroy, yet, ere thou slay,
Far from my waters drive them o’er the plain;
For now my lovely stream is fill’d with dead;
Nor can I pour my current to the sea,
With floating corpses chok’d, whilst thou pursuest
The work of death, insatiate: stay thy hand!
With horror I behold thee, mighty chief!”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Be it as thou wilt, Scamander, Heav’n-born stream;
Yet cease I not to slay until I drive
These vaunting Trojans to their walls, and prove
The force of Hector, if, in single fight,
I be by him, or he by me, subdued.”

He said, and fiercely on the Trojans rush’d,
A God in might! to Phoebus then his speech
The deeply-eddying River thus address’d:

“God of the silver bow, great son of Jove,
Obey’st thou thus the will of Saturn’s son,
Who charg’d thee by the Trojans still to stand,
And aid their cause, till ev’ning’s late approach
Should cast its shadows o’er the fertile earth?”

Thus as he spoke, from off the lofty bank
Achilles springing in mid current plung’d;
Then high the swelling stream, tumultuous, rose
In all its angry flood; and with a roar
As of a bellowing bull, cast forth to land
The num’rous corpses by Achilles slain;
And many living, in his cavern’d bed,
Conceal’d behind the whirling waters sav’d.
Fierce, round Achilles, rose the boiling wave,
And on his shield descending, drove him down;
Nor might he keep his foothold; but he grasp’d
A lofty elm, well-grown, which from the cliff
Uprooted, all the bank had torn away,
And with its tangled branches check’d the flow
Of the fair river, which with all its length
It bridg’d across; then, springing from the deep,
Swiftly he fled in terror o’er the plain.
Nor ceas’d the mighty River, but pursued,
With darkly-ruffling crest, intent to stay
Achilles’ course, and save the Trojan host.
Far as a jav’lin’s flight he rush’d, in speed
Like the dark hunter eagle, strongest deem’d,
And swiftest wing’d of all the feather’d race.
So on he sped; loud rattled on his breast
His brazen armour, as before the God,
Cow’ring, he fled; the God behind him still
With thund’ring sound pursued. As when a man
From some dark-water’d spring through trenches leads,
’Mid plants and gardens, th’ irrigating stream,
And, spade in hand, th’ appointed channel clears:
Down flows the stream anon, its pebbly bed
Disturbing; fast it flows with bubbling sound,
Down the steep slope, o’ertaking him who leads.
Achilles so th’ advancing wave o’ertook,
Though great his speed; but man must yield to Gods,
Oft as Achilles, swift of foot, essay’d
To turn and stand, and know if all the Gods,
Who dwell in Heav’n, were leagued to daunt his soul
So oft the Heav’n-born River’s mighty wave
Above his shoulders dash’d; in deep distress
He sprang on high; then rush’d the flood below,
And bore him off his legs, and wore away
The soil beneath his feet; then, groaning, thus,
As up to Heav’n he look’d, Achilles cried:
“O Father Jove, will none of all the Gods
In pity save me from this angry flood?
Content, thereafter, would I meet my fate.
Of all the pow’rs of Heav’n, my mother most
Hath wrong’d me, who hath buoy’d me up with hope
Delusive, that, before the walls of Troy,
I should by Phoebus’ swift-wing’d arrows fall.
Would that by Hector’s hand ’twere mine to die,
The bravest of their brave! a warrior so
Were by a warrior slain! now am I doom’d
Ignobly here to sink, the mighty flood
O’erwhelming me, like some poor shepherd lad,
Borne down in crossing by a wintry brook.”

He said; and quickly, cloth’d in mortal form,
Neptune and Pallas at his side appear’d;
With cheering words they took him by the hand,
And thus th’ Earth-shaking God his speech began:

“Achilles, fear not thou, nor be dismay’d;
Such pow’rful aid, by Jove’s consent, we bring,
Pallas and I, from Heav’n; ’tis not decreed
That thou shouldst by the River be o’erwhelm’d;
He shall retire ere long, and thou shalt see;
And more, if thou wilt hear, we undertake
That from the war thine arm shall not be stay’d,
Till thou shalt drive beneath the walls of Troy
The crowd of flying Trojans; thou thyself
Shalt Hector slay, and safe regain the ships:
Such high renown we give thee to achieve.”

They to the other Gods, this said, return’d;
He, greatly strengthen’d by the voice divine,
Press’d onwards to the plain; the plain he found
All flooded o’er; and, floating, armour fair,
And many a corpse of men in battle slain;
Yet onward, lifting high his feet, he press’d
Right tow’rd the stream; nor could the mighty stream
Check his advance, such vigour Pallas gave;
Nor did Scamander yet his fury stay,
But fiercer rose his rage; and rearing high
His crested wave, to Simois thus he cried:

“Dear brother, aid me with united force
This mortal’s course to check; he, unrestrain’d,
Will royal Priam’s city soon destroy,
Nor will the Trojans his assault endure.
Haste to the rescue then, and from their source
Fill all thy stream, and all thy channels swell;
Rouse thy big waves, and roll a torrent down
Of logs and stones, to whelm this man of might,
Who triumphs now, and bears him as a God.
Nought shall his strength or beauty then avail,
Or gallant arms, beneath the waters sunk,
Deep buried in the mud: himself will I
In sand imbed, and o’er his corpse a pile
Of shingly gravel heap; nor shall the Greeks
Be able to collect his bones, encas’d
By me so deep in slime. His monument
They here may raise; but when they celebrate
His fun’ral rites, no mound will he require.”

He said; and on Achilles, from on high
Came boiling, rushing down, with thund’ring roar,
With foam and blood and corpses intermix’d.
High rose the Heav’n-born River’s darkling wave,
And bore Achilles downward; then in fear
Lest the broad waters of the eddying stream
Should quite o’erwhelm him, Juno cried aloud,
And Vulcan thus, her son, in haste address’d:

“Up, Vulcan; up, my son; for we had deem’d
That eddying Xanthus stood to thee oppos’d:
Haste thee to aid; thy fiery strength display;
While from the sea I call the stormy blast
Of Zephyr and brisk Notus, who shall drive
The raging flames ahead, and burn alike
The Trojans and their arms: do thou the while
Burn down the trees on Xanthus’ banks; himself
Assail with fire, nor by his honey’d words
Nor by his menaces be turn’d aside;
Nor, till thou hear my voice, restrain thy pow’r;
Then stay the raging flames’ unwearied course.”

Thus Juno spoke; and Vulcan straight prepar’d
The heav’nly fire; and first upon the plain
The flames he kindled, and the dead consum’d,
Who lay, promiscuous, by Achilles slain:
The plain was dried, and stay’d the wat’ry flood.
As when the breath of Boreas quickly dries
In Autumn-time a newly-water’d field,
The tiller’s heart rejoicing: so was dried
The spacious plain; then he, the dead consum’d,
Against the river turn’d the fiery glare:
Burnt were the willows, elms, and tamarisk shrubs,
The lotus, and the reeds, and galingal,
Which by the lovely river grew profuse.
The eels and fishes, ’mid the eddying whirl,
’Mid the clear wave were hurrying here and there,
In dire distress from Vulcan’s fiery breath:
Scorch’d by the flames, the mighty River spoke:

“Vulcan, no God against thy pow’r can stand,
Nor with thy fiery flames will I contend;
Restrain thy wrath; though Peleus’ godlike son
Should from their city drive the Trojans straight,
With rival parties what concern have I?”

All scorch’d he spoke; his fair stream bubbling up,
As when a caldron on a blazing fire,
Fill’d with the melting fat of well-fed swine,
Boils up within, and bubbles all around,
With well-dried wood beneath, so bubbling up
The waters of the lovely River boil’d:
Nor onward would he flow, but check’d his course,
By the hot blast o’er-borne, and fiery strength
Of skilful Vulcan; and to Juno thus,
Imploring, he his winged words address’d:

“Juno, what cause impels thy son, my stream,
O’er all the rest, to visit with his wrath?
E’en less than others who the Trojans aid,
Have I offended; yet at thy command
Will I withdraw; but bid that he too cease;
And this I swear, no Trojan more to save,
Though to devouring flames a prey, all Troy
Were blazing, kindled by the valiant Greeks.”

This when the white-arm’d Goddess Juno heard,
To Vulcan straight she thus address’d her speech:
“Vulcan, my glorious son, restrain thy hand:
In mortal men’s behalf, it is not meet
To press thus hardly an Immortal God.”

She said, and Vulcan stay’d his fiery strength,
And, back returning, in his wonted bed
Flow’d the fair River. Xanthus thus subdued,
These two their warfare ceas’d, by Juno check’d,
Despite her wrath; but ’mid the other Gods
Arose contention fierce, and discord dire,
Their warring passions rous’d on either side.
With fearful crash they met: the broad Earth groan’d;
Loud rang the Heav’n as with a trumpet’s sound:
Jove, on Olympus’ height, the tumult heard,
And in his heart he laugh’d a joyous laugh,
To see the Gods in angry battle met.
Not long they stood aloof, led on by Mars
The buckler-breaker, who to Pallas first,
Poising his spear, his bitter speech address’d:

“What dost thou here, thou saucy jade, to war
The Gods exciting, overbold of mood,
Led by thy haughty spirit? dost thou forget
How thou the son of Tydeus, Diomed,
Didst urge against me, and with visible spear
Direct his aim, and aid to wound my flesh?
For all I suffer’d then, thou now shalt pay.”

Thus as he spoke, he struck the tassell’d shield,
Awful to view, which not the lightning bolt
Of Jove himself could pierce: the blood-stain’d Mars
Against it thrust in vain his pond’rous spear.
The Goddess stoop’d, and in her ample hand
Took up a stone, that lay upon the plain,
Dark, rugged, vast, which men of elder days
Had set to mark the limits of their land.
Full on the neck of Mars she hurl’d the mass,
His limbs relaxing: o’er sev’n hundred feet
Prostrate he lay, his hair defil’d with dust:
Loud rang his armour; and with scornful smile
Pallas address’d him thus with vaunting speech:

“Fool, hast thou yet to learn how mightier far
My strength than thine, that me thou dar’st to meet?
Bear thus the burthen of thy mother’s curse,
Who works thee harm, in wrath that thou the Greeks
Deserting, aid’st the haughty Trojans’ cause.”

She said, and turn’d away her piercing glance:
Him, deeply groaning, scarce to life restor’d,
Jove’s daughter Venus taking by the hand,
Led from the field; which when the white-arm’d Queen
Beheld, in haste to Pallas thus she cried:
“O Heav’n, brave child of aegis-bearing Jove,
Undaunted! lo again this saucy jade
Amid the press, the bane of mortals, Mars
Leads from the field; but haste thee in pursuit.”

Thus Juno: Pallas hasten’d in pursuit
Well pleas’d; and Venus with her pow’rful hand
Assailing, struck upon the breast; at once
The Goddess’ courage and her limbs gave way.
There on the ground the two together lay,
While Pallas o’er them thus with vaunting speech:

“Would all were such, who aid the Trojan cause,
Whene’er they meet in fight the warlike Greeks,
As valiant and as stout as Venus proves,
Who brings her aid to Mars, confronting me;
Then had our warlike labours long been o’er,
And Ilium’s strong-built citadel overthrown.”

Thus Pallas spoke: the white-arm’d Goddess smil’d,
And to Apollo thus th’ Earth-shaker spoke:

“Phoebus, why stand we idly thus aloof?
The war begun by others, ’tis not meet;
And shame it were, that to Olympus’ height
And to the brazen-floor’d abode of Jove
We two without a contest should return.
Thou then begin, as younger: ’twere not well
For me, in age and practice more advanc’d.
Feeble of soul, how senseless is thy heart!
Hast thou forgotten all the cruel wrongs
We two, alone of all th’ Immortals, bore,
When here, in Ilium, for a year, we serv’d,
By Jove’s command, the proud Laomedon,
For promis’d hire; and he our tasks assign’d?
His fortress, and a wall both broad and fair
I built, the town’s impregnable defence;
While thou didst on his plodding herds attend,
In many-crested Ida’s woody glens.
But when the joyous seasons, in their course,
Had brought our labour’s term, the haughty King
Denied our guerdon, and with threats dismiss’d.
Bound hand and foot, he threaten’d thee to send
And sell to slav’ry in the distant isles,
And with the sword cut off the ears of both.
So in indignant sorrow we return’d,
Robb’d of the hire he promis’d, but denied.
For this thy favour dost thou show to Troy;
And dost not rather join thy force to ours,
That down upon their knees the Trojans all
Should perish, with their babes and matrons chaste.”

Whom answer’d thus the far-destroying King:
“Earth-shaking God, I should not gain with thee
The esteem of wise, if I with thee should fight
For mortal men; poor wretches, who like leaves
Flourish awhile, and eat the fruits of earth,
But, sapless, soon decay: from combat then
Refrain we, and to others leave the strife.”

He turn’d, thus saying: for he deem’d it shame
His father’s brother to assail in arms;
But him his sister, Goddess of the chase,
Rebuk’d, and thus with scornful speech address’d:

“Fliest thou, Apollo? and to Neptune leav’st
The easy victory and baseless fame?
Why o’er thy shoulder hangs thine idle bow?
Ne’er in our father’s halls again, as erst
Among th’ Immortals, let me hear thee boast
How thou with Neptune wouldst in arms contend.”

Thus she; Apollo answer’d not a word;
But Jove’s imperial consort, fill’d with wrath,
Assail’d with bitter words the Archer-Queen.

“How canst thou dare, thou saucy minx, to stand[7]
Oppos’d to me, too great for thine assault,
Despite thy bow? though Jove hath giv’n thee pow’r
O’er feeble women, whom thou wilt, to slay,
E’en as a lion; better were’t for thee
To chase the mountain beasts and flying hinds,
Than thy superiors thus to meet in arms,
But since thou dar’st confront me, thou shalt know
And feel how far my might surpasses thine.”

She said; and with the left hand both the wrists
Of Dian grasping, with her ample right
The bow and quiver from her shoulders tore;
And with them, as she turn’d away her head,
With scornful laughter buffeted her ears:
The arrows keen were scatter’d on the ground:
Weeping, the Goddess fled; as flies a dove
The hawk’s pursuit, and in a hollow rock
Finds refuge, doom’d not yet to fall a prey;
So, weeping, Dian fled, and left her bow.

Them Hermes to Latona thus: “With thee
I strive not; shame it were to meet in fight
A consort of the cloud-compelling Jove.
Freely amid th’ Immortals make thy boast,
That by thy prowess thou hast vanquish’d me.”

Thus he: Latona gather’d up the bow,
And fallen arrows, scatter’d here and there
Amid the whirling dust; then, these regain’d,
Following her daughter, from the field withdrew.
Meanwhile to high Olympus fled the Maid,
And to the brazen-floor’d abode of Jove.
There, weeping, on her father’s knees she sat,
While quiver’d round her form th’ ambrosial robe.
The son of Saturn tow’rds him drew his child,
And thus, with gracious smile, enquiry made:
“Which of the heav’nly pow’rs hath wrong’d thee thus
My child, as guilty of some open shame?”

To whom the bright-crown’d Goddess of the chase:
“Thy wife, my father, white-arm’d Juno; she
Hath dealt thus rudely with me; she, from whom
All jars and strife among the Gods proceed.”

Such converse while they held, the gates of Troy
Apollo enter’d, for the well-built wall
Alarm’d, lest e’en against the will of fate
The Greeks that day should raze it to the ground.
The other Gods were to Olympus gone,
Triumphant these, and those in angry mood,
And took their seats before the cloud-girt Sire.
But on the Trojans pressing, Peleus’ son
Horses and men alike, promiscuous, slew.
As in a city, which the Gods in wrath
Have fir’d, whose volleying smoke ascends to Heav’n,
On all her people grievous toil is cast,
On many, harm and loss; such toil, such loss
Achilles wrought amid the Trojan host.

Upon a lofty tow’r, the work of Gods,
The aged Priam stood, and thence beheld
By fierce Achilles driven in flight confused,
Their courage quite subdued, the Trojan host:
Then, groaning, from the tow’r he hasten’d down,
And to the warders cried along the wall:

“Stand to the gates, and hold them open’d wide,
That in the crowd of fugitives may pour,
And refuge find; for close upon their flight
Achilles hangs; disaster now is near.
But while our friends, receiv’d within the walls,
Find time to breathe again, replace in haste
The closely-fitting portals; for I fear
That man of blood may e’en the city storm.”

He said; the gates they open’d, and drew back
The solid bars; the portals, op’ning wide,
Let in the light; but in the vacant space
Apollo stood, the Trojan host to save.
The flyers, parch’d with thirst and dust-begrim’d,
Straight for the city and the lofty wall
Made from the plain; Achilles, spear in hand,
Press’d hotly on the rearmost; for his soul
With rage was fill’d, and madd’ning lust of fame.
And now the lofty-gated city of Troy
The sons of Greece had won; but Phoebus rous’d
Agenor’s spirit, a valiant youth and strong,
Son of Antenor; he his bosom fill’d
With dauntless courage, and beside him stood
To turn aside the heavy hand of death,
As, veil’d in cloud, against the oak he lean’d.
He, when Achilles’ awful form he knew,
Yet firmly stood, though much perplex’d in mind,
As thus he commun’d with his mighty heart:

“Oh woe is me! should I attempt to fly
Before Achilles’ might, where fly the rest
Across the plain, disorder’d, he would soon
O’ertake me, and in flight ignoble slay.
Or should I leave the others to their fate,
Scatter’d by Peleus’ son; and from the wall
And o’er the plain of Troy direct my flight,
Far as the foot of Ida’s hill, and there
Lie hid in thickest covert; and at eve,
Refresh’d by bathing in the cooling stream,
And purg’d the sweat, retrace my steps to Troy?
Yet why, my soul, admit such thoughts as these?
For should he mark me flying from the town,
And overtake me by his speed of foot,
No hope were left me of escape from death.
So far his strength exceeds the strength of man.
But how if boldly I await him here
Before the wall? his flesh is not to wounds
Impervious: but a single life is his,
Nor is he more, they say, than mortal man,
Though Jove assists him, and his triumph wills.”

He said, and stood collected, to await
Achilles’ onset; and his manly heart,
With courage fill’d, was eager for the fray.
As when a panther from the thicket’s depth
Comes forth to meet the hunter, undismay’d,
Nor turn’d to flight by baying of the hounds;
Nor, wounded or by jav’lin or by sword,
Or by the spear transfix’d, remits her rage,
But fights, until she reach her foe, or die;
Agenor so, Antenor’s godlike son,
Disdain’d to fly, ere prove Achilles’ might.
Before his breast his shield’s broad orb he bore,
And pois’d his spear, as thus he call’d aloud:

“Thy hope, renown’d Achilles, was this day
The valiant Trojans’ city to destroy;
Unconscious of the toils, the woes, that ye
Around her walls await ye! for within
Are warriors brave and num’rous, who will fight
In her defence, for parents, children, wives.
Thou too, Achilles, here shalt meet thy doom,
All-pow’rful as thou art, and warrior bold.”

He said, and threw with stalwart hand the spear;
Achilles’ leg he struck, below the knee,
Nor miss’d his aim; and loudly rang the greaves
Of new-wrought tin; but back the brazen point
Rebounded, nor the heav’nly armour pierc’d.
In turn Achilles on Agenor sprang:
But Phoebus robb’d him of his hop’d-for prize,
Who, veil’d in thickest cloud, convey’d away
Antenor’s son, and from the battle bore
To rest in peace; while he by guile withdrew
The son of Peleus from the flying crowd:
For in Agenor’s very likeness clad,
Before him stood the far-destroying King:
Then fled, Achilles hast’ning in pursuit.
He o’er the fertile plain with flying foot
Pursu’d; beside Scamander’s eddying stream
Apollo turn’d, and still but little space
Before him flying, subtly lur’d him on,
Each moment hoping to attain his prize.
Meantime the gen’ral crowd, in panic flight,
With eager haste the city’s refuge sought,
And all the town with fugitives was fill’d.
Nor did they dare without the walls to stand
For mutual aid; nor halt to know what friends
Were safe, who left upon the battle-field;
But through the gates pour’d in the hurrying mass
Who to their active limbs their safety ow’d.



ARGUMENT.

THE DEATH OF HECTOR.


The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his
son to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins his entreaties, but in vain.
Hector consults within himself what measures to take; but, at the
advance of Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies: Achilles
pursues him thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning
the fate of Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles.
She deludes Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and
is slain. Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot, in the sight of
Priam and Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries
reach the ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into
the inner part of the palace; she mounts up to the walls, and beholds
her dead husband. She swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and
lamentation.

The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls, and
on the battlements of Troy.

BOOK XXII.

Thus they from panic flight, like timorous fawns.
Within the walls escaping, dried their sweat,
And drank, and quench’d their thirst, reclining safe
On the fair battlements; but nearer drew,
With slanted shields, the Greeks; yet Hector still
In front of Ilium and the Scaean gate,
Stay’d by his evil doom, remain’d without;
Then Phoebus thus to Peleus’ godlike son:
“Achilles, why with active feet pursue,
Thou mortal, me Immortal? know’st thou not
My Godhead, that so hot thy fury burns?
Or heed’st thou not that all the Trojan host
Whom thou hast scar’d, while thou art here withdrawn,
Within the walls a refuge safe have found?
On me thy sword is vain! I know not death!”

Enrag’d, Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“Deep is the injury, far-darting King,
Most hostile of the Gods, that at thy hand
I bear, who here hast lur’d me from the walls,
Which many a Trojan else had fail’d to reach,
Ere by my hand they bit the bloody dust.
Me of immortal honour thou hast robb’d,
And them, thyself from vengeance safe, hast sav’d.
Had I the pow’r, that vengeance thou shouldst feel.”

Thus saying, and on mightiest deeds intent,
He turn’d him city-ward, with fiery speed;
As when a horse, contending for the prize,
Whirls the swift car, and stretches o’er the plain,
E’en so, with active limbs, Achilles rac’d.

Him first the aged Priam’s eyes discern’d,
Scouring the plain, in arms all dazzling bright,
Like to th’ autumnal star, whose brilliant ray
Shines eminent amid the depth of night,
Whom men the dog-star of Orion call;
The brightest he, but sign to mortal man
Of evil augury, and fiery heat:
So shone the brass upon the warrior’s breast.

The old man groan’d aloud, and lifting high
His hands, he beat his head, and with loud voice
Call’d on his son, imploring; he, unmov’d,
Held post before the gates, awaiting there
Achilles’ fierce encounter; him his sire,
With hands outstretch’d and piteous tone, address’d:

“Hector, my son, await not here alone
That warrior’s charge, lest thou to fate succumb,
Beneath Pelides’ arm, thy better far!
Accurs’d be he! would that th’ immortal Gods
So favour’d him as I! then should his corpse
Soon to the vultures and the dogs be giv’n!
(So should my heart a load of anguish lose)
By whom I am of many sons bereav’d,
Many and brave, whom he has slain, or sold
To distant isles in slav’ry; and e’en now,
Within the city walls I look in vain
For two, Lycaon brave, and Polydore,
My gallant sons, by fair Laothoe:
If haply yet they live, with brass and gold
Their ransom shall be paid; good store of these
We can command; for with his daughter fair
A wealthy dowry aged Altes gave.
But to the viewless shades should they have gone,
Deep were their mother’s sorrow and my own;
But of the gen’ral public, well I know
Far lighter were the grief, than if they heard
That thou hadst fall’n beneath Achilles’ hand.
Then enter now, my son, the city gates,
And of the women and the men of Troy,
Be still the guardian; nor to Peleus’ son,
With thine own life, immortal glory give.
Look too on me with pity; me, on whom,
E’en on the threshold of mine age, hath Jove
A bitter burthen cast, condemn’d to see
My sons struck down, my daughters dragg’d away
In servile bonds; our chambers’ sanctity
Invaded; and our babes by hostile hands
Dash’d to the ground; and by ferocious Greeks
Enslav’d the widows of my slaughter’d sons.
On me at last the rav’ning dogs shall feed,
When by some foeman’s hand, by sword or lance,
My soul shall from my body be divorc’d;
Those very dogs which I myself have bred,
Fed at my table, guardians of my gate,
Shall lap my blood, and over-gorg’d shall lie
E’en on my threshold. That a youth should fall
Victim, to Mars, beneath a foeman’s spear,
May well beseem his years; and if he fall
With honour, though he die, yet glorious he!
But when the hoary head and hoary beard,
And naked corpse to rav’ning dogs are giv’n,
No sadder sight can wretched mortals see.”

The old man spoke, and from, his head he tore
The hoary hair; yet Hector firm remain’d.
Then to the front his mother rush’d, in tears,
Her bosom bare, with either hand her breast
Sustaining, and with tears address’d him thus:
“Hector, my child, thy mother’s breast revere;
And on this bosom if thine infant woes
Have e’er been hush’d, bear now in mind, dear child,
The debt thou ow’st; and from within the walls
Ward off this fearful man, nor in the field
Encounter; curs’d be he! should he prevail,
And slay thee, not upon the fun’ral bed,
My child, my own, the offspring of my womb,
Shall I deplore thee, nor thy widow’d wife,
But far away, beside the Grecian ships,
Thy corpse shall to the rav’ning dogs be giv’n.”

Thus they, with tears and earnest pray’rs imploring,
Address’d their son; yet Hector firm remain’d,
Waiting th’ approach of Peleus’ godlike son.
As when a snake upon the mountain side,
With deadly venom charg’d, beside his hole,
Awaits the traveller, and fill’d with rage,
Coil’d round his hole, his baleful glances darts;
So fill’d with dauntless courage Hector stood,
Scorning retreat, his gleaming buckler propp’d
Against the jutting tow’r; then, deeply mov’d,
Thus with his warlike soul communion held:

“Oh woe is me! if I should enter now
The city gates, I should the just reproach
Encounter of Polydamas, who first
His counsel gave within the walls to lead
The Trojan forces, on that fatal night
When great Achilles in the field appear’d.
I heeded not his counsel; would I had!
Now, since my folly hath the people slain,
I well might blush to meet the Trojan men,
And long-rob’d dames of Troy, lest some might say,
To me inferior far, ‘This woful loss
To Hector’s blind self-confidence we owe.’
Thus shall they say; for me, ’twere better far,
Or from Achilles, slain in open fight,
Back to return in triumph, or myself
To perish nobly in my country’s cause.
What if my bossy shield I lay aside,
And stubborn helmet, and my pond’rous spear
Propping against the wall, go forth to meet
Th’ unmatch’d Achilles? What if I engage
That Helen’s self, and with her all the spoil,
And all that Paris in his hollow ships
Brought here to Troy, whence first this war arose,
Should be restor’d; and to the Greeks be paid
An ample tribute from the city’s stores,
Her secret treasures; and hereafter bind
The Trojans by their Elders’ solemn oaths
Nought to withhold, but fairly to divide
Whate’er of wealth our much-loved city holds?
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Should I so meet him, what if he should show
Nor pity nor remorse, but slay me there,
Defenceless as a woman, and unarm’d?
Not this the time, nor he the man, with whom
By forest oak or rock, like youth and maid,
To hold light talk, as youth and maid might hold.
Better to dare the fight, and know at once
To whom the vict’ry is decreed by Heav’n.”

Thus, as he stood, he mus’d; but near approach’d
Achilles, terrible as plumed Mars;
From his right shoulder brandishing aloft
The ashen spear of Peleus, while around
Flash’d his bright armour, dazzling as the glare
Of burning fire, or of the rising sun.
Hector beheld, and trembled at the sight;
Nor dar’d he there await th’ attack, but left
The gates behind, and, terror-stricken, fled.
Forward, with flying foot, Pelides rush’d.
As when a falcon, bird of swiftest flight,
From some high mountain-top, on tim’rous dove
Swoops fiercely down; she, from beneath, in fear,
Evades the stroke; he, dashing through the brake,
Shrill-shrieking, pounces on his destin’d prey;
So, wing’d with desp’rate hate, Achilles flew,
So Hector, flying from his keen pursuit,
Beneath the walls his active sinews plied.
They by the watch-tow’r, and beneath the wall
Where stood the wind-beat fig-tree, rac’d amain
Along the public road, until they reach’d
The fairly-flowing fount whence issu’d forth,
From double source, Scamander’s eddying streams.
One with hot current flows, and from beneath,
As from a furnace, clouds of steam arise;
’Mid summer’s heat the other rises cold
As hail, or snow, or water crystalliz’d;
Beside the fountains stood the washing-troughs
Of well-wrought stone, where erst the wives of Troy
And daughters fair their choicest garments wash’d,
In peaceful times, ere came the sons of Greece.
There rac’d they, one in flight, and one pursuing;
Good he who fled, but better who pursu’d,
With fiery speed; for on that race was stak’d
No common victim, no ignoble ox:
The prize at stake was mighty Hector’s life.
As when the solid-footed horses fly
Around the course, contending for the prize,
Tripod, or woman of her lord bereft;
So rac’d they thrice around the walls of Troy
With active feet; and all the Gods beheld.
Then thus began the Sire of Gods and men:
“A woful sight mine eyes behold; a man
I love in flight around the walls! my heart
For Hector grieves, who, now upon the crown
Of deeply-furrow’d Ida, now again
On Ilium’s heights, with fat of choicest bulls
Hath pil’d mine altar; whom around the walls,
With flying speed Achilles now pursues.
Give me your counsel, Gods, and say, from death
If we shall rescue him, or must he die,
Brave as he is, beneath Pelides’ hand?”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess, Pallas, thus:
“O Father, lightning-flashing, cloud-girt King,
What words are these? wouldst thou a mortal man,
Long doom’d by fate, again from death preserve?
Do as thou wilt, but not with our consent.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller thus replied:
“Be of good cheer, my child! unwillingly
I speak, yet both thy wishes to oppose:
Have then thy will, and draw not back thy hand.”

His words fresh impulse gave to Pallas’ zeal,
And from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped.

Meanwhile on Hector, with untiring hate.
The swift Achilles press’d: as when a hound,
Through glen and tangled brake, pursues a fawn,
Rous’d from its lair upon the mountain side;
And if awhile it should evade pursuit,
Low crouching in the copse, yet quests he back,
Searching unwearied, till he find the trace;
So Hector sought to baffle, but in vain,
The keen pursuit of Peleus’ active son.
Oft as he sought the shelter of the gates
Beneath the well-built tow’rs, if haply thence
His comrades’ weapons might some aid afford;
So oft his foeman, with superior speed,
Would cut him off, and turn him to the plain.
He tow’rd the city still essay’d his flight;
And as in dreams, when one pursues in vain,
One seeks in vain to fly, the other seeks
As vainly to pursue; so could not now
Achilles reach, nor Hector quit, his foe.
Yet how should Hector now the doom of death
Have ’scap’d, had not Apollo once again,
And for the last time, to his rescue come,
And giv’n him strength and suppleness of limb?

Then to the crowd Achilles with his head
Made sign that none at Hector should presume
To cast a spear, lest one might wound, and so
The greater glory obtain, while he himself
Must be contented with the second place.
But when the fourth time in their rapid course
The founts were reach’d, th’ Eternal Father hung
His golden scales aloft, and plac’d in each
The lots of doom, for great Achilles one,
For Hector one, and held them by the midst:
Down sank the scale, weighted with Hector’s death,
Down to the shades, and Phoebus left his side.

Then to Pelides came the blue-ey’d Maid,
And stood beside him, and bespoke him thus:
“Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n, I trust that now
To thee and me great glory shall accrue
In Hector’s fall, insatiate of the fight.
Escape he cannot now, though at the feet
Of aegis-bearing Jove, on his behalf,
With earnest pray’r Apollo prostrate fall.
But stay thou here and take thy breath, while I
Persuade him to return and dare the fight.”

So Pallas spoke; and he with joy obeying,
Stood leaning on his brass-barb’d ashen spear.
The Goddess left him there, and went (the form
And voice assuming of Deiphobus)
In search of godlike Hector; him she found,
And standing near, with winged words address’d:

“Sorely, good brother, hast thou been bested
By fierce Achilles, who around the walls
Hath chas’d thee with swift foot; now stand we both
For mutual succour, and his onset wait.”

To whom great Hector of the glancing helm:
“Deiphobus, of all my brothers, sons
Of Hecuba and Priam, thou hast been
Still dearest to my heart; and now the more
I honour thee who dar’st on my behalf,
Seeing my peril, from within the walls
To sally forth, while others skulk behind.”

To whom the blue-ey’d Goddess thus replied:
“With many pray’rs, good brother, both our sire
And honour’d mother, and our comrades all
Successively implored me to remain;
Such fear is fall’n on all; but in my soul
On thine account too deep a grief I felt.
Now, forward boldly! spare we not our spears;
Make trial if Achilles to the ships
From both of us our bloody spoils can bear,
Or by thine arm himself may be subdued.”

Thus Pallas lur’d him on with treach’rous wile;
But when the two were met, and close at hand,
First spoke great Hector of the glancing helm:

“No more before thee, Peleus’ son, I fly:
Thrice have I fled around the walls, nor dar’d
Await thine onset; now my spirit is rous’d
To stand before thee, to be slain, or slay.
But let us first th’ immortal Gods invoke;
The surest witnesses and guardians they
Of compacts: at my hand no foul disgrace
Shalt thou sustain, if Jove with victory
Shall crown my firm endurance, and thy life
To me be forfeit; of thine armour stripp’d
I promise thee, Achilles, to the Greeks
Thy body to restore; do thou the like.”

With fierce regard Achilles answer’d thus:
“Hector, thou object of my deadly hate,
Talk not to me of compacts; as ’tween men
And lions no firm concord can exist,
Nor wolves and lambs in harmony unite,
But ceaseless enmity between them dwells:
So not in friendly terms, nor compact firm,
Can thou and I unite, till one of us
Glut with his blood the mail-clad warrior Mars.
Mind thee of all thy fence; behoves thee now
To prove a spearman skill’d, and warrior brave.
For thee escape is none; now, by my spear,
Hath Pallas doom’d thy death; my comrades’ blood,
Which thou hast shed, shall all be now aveng’d.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his weighty spear;
But Hector saw, and shunn’d the blow; he stoop’d,
And o’er his shoulder flew the brass-tipp’d spear,
And in the ground was fix’d; but Pallas drew
The weapon forth, and to Achilles’ hand,
All unobserv’d of Hector, gave it back.
Then Hector thus to Peleus’ matchless son:

“Thine aim has fail’d; nor truly has my fate,
Thou godlike son of Peleus, been to thee
From Heav’n reveal’d; such was indeed thy boast;
But flippant was thy speech, and subtly fram’d
To scare me with big words, and make me prove
False to my wonted prowess and renown.
Not in my back will I receive thy spear,
But through my breast, confronting thee, if Jove
Have to thine arm indeed such triumph giv’n.
Now, if thou canst, my spear in turn elude;
May it be deeply buried in thy flesh!
For lighter were to Troy the load of war,
If thou, the greatest of her foes, wert slain.”

He said, and poising, hurl’d his pond’rous spear;
Nor miss’d his aim; full in the midst he struck
Pelides’ shield; but glancing from the shield
The weapon bounded off. Hector was griev’d,
That thus his spear had bootless left his hand.
He stood aghast; no second spear was nigh:
And loudly on Deiphobus he call’d
A spear to bring; but he was far away.
Then Hector knew that he was dup’d, and cried,
“Oh Heav’n! the Gods above have doom’d my death!
I deem’d indeed that brave Deiphobus
Was near at hand; but he within the walls
Is safe, and I by Pallas am betray’d.
Now is my death at hand, nor far away:
Escape is none; since so hath Jove decreed,
And Jove’s far-darting son, who heretofore
Have been my guards; my fate hath found me now.
Yet not without a struggle let me die,
Nor all inglorious; but let some great act,
Which future days may hear of, mark my fall.”

Thus as he spoke, his sharp-edged sword he drew,
Pond’rous and vast, suspended at his side;
Collected for the spring, and forward dash’d:
As when an eagle, bird of loftiest flight,
Through the dark clouds swoops downward on the plain,
To seize some tender lamb, or cow’ring hare;
So Hector rush’d, and wav’d his sharp-edg’d sword.
Achilles’ wrath was rous’d: with fury wild
His soul was fill’d: before his breast he bore
His well-wrought shield; and fiercely on his brow
Nodded the four-plum’d helm, as on the breeze
Floated the golden hairs, with which the crest
By Vulcan’s hand was thickly interlac’d;
And as amid the stars’ unnumber’d host,
When twilight yields to night, one star appears,
Hesper, the brightest star that shines in Heav’n,
Gleam’d the sharp-pointed lance, which in his right
Achilles pois’d, on godlike Hector’s doom
Intent, and scanning eagerly to see
Where from attack his body least was fenc’d.
All else the glitt’ring armour guarded well,
Which Hector from Patroclus’ corpse had stripp’d;
One chink appear’d, just where the collar-bone
The neck and shoulder parts, beside the throat,
Where lies expos’d the swiftest road of death.
There levell’d he, as Hector onward rush’d;
Right through the yielding neck the lance was driv’n,
But sever’d not the windpipe, nor destroy’d
His pow’r of speech; prone in the dust he fell;
And o’er him, vaunting, thus Achilles spoke:

“Hector, Patroclus stripping of his arms,
Thy hope was that thyself wast safe; and I,
Not present, brought no terror to thy soul:
Fool! in the hollow ships I yet remain’d,
I, his avenger, mightier far than he;
I, who am now thy conqu’ror. By the dogs
And vultures shall thy corpse be foully torn,
While him the Greeks with fun’ral rites shall grace.”

Whom answer’d Hector of the glancing helm,
Prostrate and helpless: “By thy soul, thy knees,
Thy parents’ heads, Achilles, I beseech,
Let not my corpse by Grecian dogs be torn.
Accept the ample stores of brass and gold,
Which as my ransom by my honour’d sire
And mother shall be paid thee; but my corpse
Restore, that so the men and wives of Troy
May deck with honours due my fun’ral pyre.”

To whom, with fierce aspect, Achilles thus:
“Knee me no knees, vile hound! nor prate to me
Of parents! such my hatred, that almost
I could persuade myself to tear and eat
Thy mangled flesh; such wrongs I have to avenge,
He lives not, who can save thee from the dogs;
Not though with ransom ten and twenty fold
He here should stand, and yet should promise more;
No, not though Priam’s royal self should sue
To be allow’d for gold to ransom thee;
No, not e’en so, thy mother shall obtain
To lay thee out upon the couch, and mourn
O’er thee, her offspring; but on all thy limbs
Shall dogs and carrion vultures make their feast.”

To whom thus Hector of the glancing helm,
Dying: “I know thee well; nor did I hope
To change thy purpose; iron is thy soul.
But see that on thy head I bring not down
The wrath of Heav’n, when by the Scaean gate
The hand of Paris, with Apollo’s aid,
Brave warrior as thou art, shall strike thee down.”

E’en as he spoke, his eyes were clos’d in death;
And to the viewless shades his spirit fled,
Mourning his fate, his youth and vigour lost.

To him, though dead, Achilles thus replied:
“Die thou! my fate I then shall meet, whene’er
Jove and th’ immortal Gods shall so decree.”

He said, and from the corpse his spear withdrew,
And laid aside; then stripp’d the armour off,
With, blood besmear’d; the Greeks around him throng’d,
Gazing on Hector’s noble form and face,
And none approach’d that did not add a wound:
And one to other look’d, and said, “Good faith,
Hector is easier far to handle now,
Then when erewhile he wrapp’d our ships in fire.”
Thus would they say, then stab the dead anew.

But when the son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Had stripp’d the armour from the corpse, he rose,
And, standing, thus th’ assembled Greeks address’d:
“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Since Heav’n hath granted us this man to slay,
Whose single arm hath wrought us more of ill
Than all the rest combin’d, advance we now
Before the city in arms, and trial make
What is the mind of Troy; if, Hector slain,
They from the citadel intend retreat,
Or still, despite their loss, their ground maintain.
But wherefore entertain such thoughts, my soul?
Beside the ships, unwept, unburied, lies
Patroclus: whom I never can forget,
While number’d with the living, and my limbs
Have pow’r to move; in Hades though the dead
May be forgotten, yet e’en there will I
The mem’ry of my lov’d companion keep.
Now to the ships return we, sons of Greece,
Glad paeans singing! with us he shall go;
Great glory is ours, the godlike Hector slain,
The pride of Troy, and as a God rever’d.”

He said, and foully Hector’s corpse misus’d;
Of either foot he pierc’d the tendon through,
That from the ancle passes to the heel,
And to his chariot bound with leathern thongs,
Leaving the head to trail along the ground;
Then mounted, with the captur’d arms, his car,
And urg’d his horses; nothing loth, they flew.
A cloud of dust the trailing body rais’d:
Loose hung his glossy hair; and in the dust
Was laid that noble head, so graceful once;
Now to foul insult doom’d by Jove’s decree,
In his own country, by a foeman’s hand.
So lay the head of Hector; at the sight
His aged mother tore her hair, and far
From off her head the glitt’ring veil she threw,
And with loud cries her slaughter’d son bewail’d.
Piteous, his father groan’d; and all around
Was heard the voice of wailing and of woe.
Such was the cry, as if the beetling height
Of Ilium all were smould’ring in the fire.
Scarce in his anguish could the crowd restrain
The old man from issuing through the Dardan gates;
Low in the dust he roll’d, imploring all,
Entreating by his name each sev’ral man:
“Forbear, my friends; though sorrowing, stay me not;
Leave me to reach alone the Grecian ships,
And there implore this man of violence,
This haughty chief, if haply he my years
May rev’rence, and have pity on my age.
For he too has a father, like to me;
Peleus, by whom he was begot, and bred,
The bane of Troy; and, most of all, to me
The cause of endless grief, who by his hand
Have been of many stalwart sons bereft.
Yet all, though griev’d for all, I less lament,
Than one, whose loss will sink me to the grave,
Hector! oh would to Heav’n that in mine arms
He could have died; with mourning then and tears
We might have satisfied our grief, both she
Who bore him, hapless mother, and myself.”

Weeping, he spoke; and with him wept the crowd:
Then, ’mid the women, Hecuba pour’d forth
Her vehement grief: “My child, oh whither now,
Heart-stricken, shall I go, of thee bereft,
Of thee, who wast to me by night and day
A glory and a boast; the strength of all
The men of Troy, and women? as a God
They worshipp’d thee: for in thy life thou wast
The glory of all; but fate hath found thee now.”

Weeping, she spoke; but nought as yet was known
To Hector’s wife; to her no messenger
Had brought the tidings, that without the walls
Remained her husband; in her house withdrawn
A web she wove, all purple, double woof,
With varied flow’rs in rich embroidery,
And to her neat-hair’d maidens gave command
To place the largest caldrons on the fire,
That with warm baths, returning from the fight,
Hector might be refresh’d; unconscious she,
That by Achilles’ hand, with Pallas’ aid,
Far from the bath, was godlike Hector slain.
The sounds of wailing reach’d her from the tow’r;
Totter’d her limbs, the distaff left her hand,
And to her neat-hair’d maidens thus she spoke:
“Haste, follow me, some two, that I may know
What mean these sounds; my honour’d mother’s voice
I hear; and in my breast my beating heart
Leaps to my mouth; my limbs refuse to move;
Some evil, sure, on Priam’s house impends.
Be unfulfill’d my words! yet much I fear
Lest my brave Hector be cut off alone,
By great Achilles, from the walls of Troy,
Chas’d to the plain, the desp’rate courage quench’d,
Which ever led him from the gen’ral ranks
Far in advance, and bade him yield to none.”

Then from the house she rush’d, like one distract,
With beating heart; and with her went her maids.
But when she reach’d the tow’r, where stood the crowd,
And mounted on the wall, she look’d around,
And saw the body which with insult foul
The flying steeds were dragging towards the ships;
Then sudden darkness overspread her eyes;
Backward she fell, and gasp’d her spirit away.
Far off were flung th’ adornments of her head,
The net, the fillet, and the woven bands;
The nuptial veil by golden Venus giv’n,
That day when Hector of the glancing helm
Led from Eetion’s house his wealthy bride.
The sisters of her husband round her press’d,
And held, as in the deadly swoon she lay.
But when her breath and spirit return’d again,
With sudden burst of anguish thus she cried:
“Hector, oh woe is me! to misery
We both were born alike; thou here in Troy
In Priam’s royal palace; I in Thebes,
By wooded Placos, in Eetion’s house,
Who nurs’d my infancy; unhappy he,
Unhappier I! would I had ne’er been born!
Now thou beneath the depths of earth art gone,
Gone to the viewless shades; and me hast left
A widow in thy house, in deepest woe;
Our child, an infant still, thy child and mine,
Ill-fated parents both! nor thou to him,
Hector, shalt be a guard, nor he to thee:
For though he ’scape this tearful war with Greece,
Yet nought for him remains but ceaseless woe,
And strangers on his heritage shall seize.
No young companions own the orphan boy:
With downcast eyes, and cheeks bedew’d with tears,
His father’s friends approaching, pinch’d with want,
He hangs upon the skirt of one, of one
He plucks the cloak; perchance in pity some
May at their tables let him sip the cup,
Moisten his lips, but scarce his palate touch;
While youths, with both surviving parents bless’d,
May drive him from their feast with blows and taunts,
‘Begone! thy father sits not at our board:’
Then weeping, to his widow’d mother’s arms
He flies, that orphan boy, Astyanax,
Who on his father’s knees erewhile was fed
On choicest marrow, and the fat of lambs;
And, when in sleep his childish play was hush’d,
Was lull’d to slumber in his nurse’s arms
On softest couch, by all delights surrounded.
But grief, his father lost, awaits him now,
Astyanax, of Trojans so surnam’d,
Since thou alone wast Troy’s defence and guard.
But now on thee, beside the beaked ships,
Far from thy parents, when the rav’ning dogs
Have had their fill, the wriggling worms shall feed;
On thee, all naked; while within thy house
Lies store of raiment, rich and rare, the work
Of women’s hands; these will I burn with fire;
Not for thy need—thou ne’er shalt wear them more,—
But for thine honour in the sight of Troy.”

Weeping she spoke; the women join’d her wail.



ARGUMENT.

FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.


Achilles and the Myrmidons do honour to the body of Patroclus. After
the funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep,
the ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of
burial: the next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons
to fetch wood for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering
their hair to the dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and
lastly, twelve Trojan captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He
pays libations to the winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and
raise the flame. When the pile has burned all night, they gather the
bones, place them in an urn of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles
institutes the funeral games: the chariot-race, the fight of the
caestus, the wrestling, the footrace, the single combat, the discus,
the shooting with arrows, the darting the javelin: the various
descriptions of which, and the various success of the several
antagonists, make the greatest part of the book.

In this book ends the thirtieth day: the night following, the ghost of
Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in
felling the timber for the pile; the two-and-thirtieth in burning it;
and the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene is generally on the
sea-shore.

BOOK XXIII.

Thus they throughout the city made their moan;
But when the Greeks had come where lay their ships
By the broad Hellespont, their sev’ral ways
They each pursu’d, dispersing; yet not so
Achilles let his Myrmidons disperse,
But thus his warlike comrades he address’d:

“My faithful comrades, valiant Myrmidons,
Loose we not yet our horses from the cars;
But for Patroclus mourn, approaching near,
With horse and car; such tribute claim the dead;
Then, free indulgence to our sorrows giv’n,
Loose we the steeds, and share the ev’ning meal.”

He said; and they with mingled voices rais’d
The solemn dirge; Achilles led the strain;
Thrice round the dead they drove their sleek-skinn’d steeds,
Mourning, with hearts by Thetis grief-inspir’d;
With tears the sands, with tears the warriors’ arms,
Were wet; so mighty was the chief they mourn’d.
Then on his comrade’s breast Achilles laid
His blood-stain’d hands, and thus began the wail:

“All hail, Patroclus, though in Pluto’s realm;
All that I promis’d, lo! I now perform;
That on the corpse of Hector, hither dragg’d,
Our dogs should feed; and that twelve noble youths,
The sons of Troy, before thy fun’ral pyre,
My hand, in vengeance for thy death, should slay.”

He said, and foully Hector’s corpse misus’d,
Flung prostrate in the dust, beside the couch
Where lay Menoetius’ son. His comrades then
Their glitt’ring armour doff’d, of polish’d brass,
And loos’d their neighing steeds; then round the ship
Of Peleus’ son in countless numbers sat,
While he th’ abundant fun’ral feast dispens’d.
There many a steer lay stretch’d beneath the knife,
And many a sheep, and many a bleating goat,
And many a white-tusk’d porker, rich in fat,
There lay extended, singeing o’er the fire;
And blood, in torrents, flow’d around the corpse.
To Agamemnon then the Kings of Greece
The royal son of Peleus, swift of foot,
Conducted; yet with him they scarce prevail’d;
So fierce his anger for his comrade’s death.
But when to Agamemnon’s tent they came,
He to the clear-voic’d heralds gave command
An ample tripod on the fire to place;
If haply Peleus’ son he might persuade
To wash away the bloody stains of war:
But sternly he, and with an oath refus’d.

“No, by great Jove I swear, of all the Gods
Highest and mightiest, water shall not touch
This head of mine, till on the fun’ral pyre
I see the body of Patroclus laid,
And build his tomb, and cut my votive hair;
For while I live and move ’mid mortal men,
No second grief like this can pierce my soul.
Observe we now the mournful fun’ral feast;
But thou, great Agamemnon, King of men,
Send forth at early dawn, and to the camp
Bring store of fuel, and all else prepare,
That with provision meet the dead may pass
Down to the realms of night; so shall the fire
From out our sight consume our mighty dead,
And to their wonted tasks the troops return.”

He said; they listen’d, and his words obey’d;
Then busily the ev’ning meal prepar’d,
And shar’d the social feast; nor lack’d there aught.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
Each to their sev’ral tents the rest repair’d;
But on the many-dashing ocean’s shore
Pelides lay, amid his Myrmidons,
With bitter groans; in a clear space he lay,
Where broke the waves, continuous, on the beach.
There, circumfus’d around him, gentle sleep,
Lulling the sorrows of his heart to rest,
O’ercame his senses; for the hot pursuit
Of Hector round the breezy heights of Troy
His active limbs had wearied: as he slept,
Sudden appear’d Patroclus’ mournful shade,
His very self; his height, and beauteous eyes,
And voice; the very garb he wont to wear:
Above his head it stood, and thus it spoke:

“Sleep’st thou, Achilles, mindless of thy friend,
Neglecting, not the living, but the dead?
Hasten my fun’ral rites, that I may pass
Through Hades’ gloomy gates; ere those be done,
The spirits and spectres of departed men
Drive me far from them, nor allow to cross
Th’ abhorred river; but forlorn and sad
I wander through the wide-spread realms of night.
And give me now thy hand, whereon to weep;
For never more, when laid upon the pyre,
Shall I return from Hades; never more,
Apart from all our comrades, shall we two,
As friends, sweet counsel take; for me, stern Death,
The common lot of man, has op’d his mouth;
Thou too, Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Art destin’d here beneath the walls of Troy
To meet thy doom; yet one thing must I add,
And make, if thou wilt grant it, one request.
Let not my bones be laid apart from thine,
Achilles, but together, as our youth
Was spent together in thy father’s house,
Since first my sire Menoetius me a boy
From Opus brought, a luckless homicide,
Who of Amphidamas, by evil chance,
Had slain the son, disputing o’er the dice:
Me noble Peleus in his house receiv’d,
And kindly nurs’d, and thine attendant nam’d;
So in one urn be now our bones enclos’d,
The golden vase, thy Goddess-mother’s gift.”

Whom answer’d thus Achilles, swift of foot:
“Why art thou here, lov’d being? why on me
These sev’ral charges lay? whate’er thou bidd’st
Will I perform, and all thy mind fulfil;
But draw thou near; and in one short embrace,
Let us, while yet we may, our grief indulge.”

Thus as he spoke, he spread his longing arms,
But nought he clasp’d; and with a wailing cry,
Vanish’d, like smoke, the spirit beneath the earth.
Up sprang Achilles, all amaz’d, and smote
His hands together, and lamenting cried:

“O Heav’n, there are then, in the realms below,
Spirits and spectres, unsubstantial all;
For through the night Patroclus’ shade hath stood,
Weeping and wailing, at my side, and told
His bidding; th’ image of himself it seem’d.”

He said; his words the gen’ral grief arous’d:
To them, as round the piteous dead they mourn’d,
Appear’d the rosy-finger’d morn; and straight,
From all the camp, by Agamemnon sent,
Went forth, in search of fuel, men and mules,
Led by a valiant chief, Meriones,
The follower of renown’d Idomeneus.
Their felling axes in their hands they bore,
And twisted ropes; their mules before them driv’n;
Now up, now down, now sideways, now aslope,
They journey’d on; but when they reach’d the foot
Of spring-abounding Ida, they began
With axes keen to hew the lofty oaks;
They, loudly crashing, fell: the wood they clove,
And bound it to the mules; these took their way
Through the thick brushwood, hurrying to the plain.
The axe-men too, so bade Meriones,
The follower of renown’d Idomeneus,
Were laden all with logs, which on the beach
They laid in order, where a lofty mound,
In mem’ry of Patroclus and himself,
Achilles had design’d. When all the store
Of wood was duly laid, the rest remain’d
In masses seated; but Achilles bade
The warlike Myrmidons their armour don,
And harness each his horses to his car;
They rose and donn’d their arms, and on the cars
Warriors and charioteers their places took.

First came the horse, and then a cloud of foot,
Unnumber’d; in the midst Patroclus came,
Borne by his comrades; all the corpse with hair
They cover’d o’er, which from their heads they shore.
Behind, Achilles held his head, and mourn’d
The noble friend whom to the tomb he bore.
Then on the spot by Peleus’ son assign’d,
They laid him down, and pil’d the wood on high.
Then a fresh thought Achilles’ mind conceiv’d:
Standing apart, the yellow locks he shore,
Which as an off’ring to Sperchius’ stream,
He nurs’d in rich profusion; sorrowing then
Look’d o’er the dark-blue sea, as thus he spoke:

“Sperchius, all in vain to thee his pray’r
My father Peleus made, and vow’d that I,
Return’d in safety to my native land,
To thee should dedicate my hair, and pay
A solemn hecatomb, with sacrifice
Of fifty rams, unblemish’d, to the springs
Where on thy consecrated soil is plac’d
Thine incense-honour’d altar; so he vow’d;
But thou the boon withhold’st; since I no more
My native land may see, the hair he vow’d,
To brave Patroclus thus I dedicate.”

He said, and on his comrade’s hand he laid
The locks; his act the gen’ral grief arous’d;
And now the setting sun had found them still
Indulging o’er the dead; but Peleus’ son
Approaching, thus to Agamemnon spoke:

“Atrides, for to thee the people pay
Readiest obedience, mourning too prolong’d
May weary; thou then from the pyre the rest
Disperse, and bid prepare the morning meal;
Ours be the farther charge, to whom the dead
Was chiefly dear; yet let the chiefs remain.”

The monarch Agamemnon heard, and straight
Dispers’d the crowd amid their sev’ral ships.
Th’ appointed band remain’d, and pil’d the wood.
A hundred feet each way they built the pyre,
And on the summit, sorrowing, laid the dead.
Then many a sheep and many a slow-paced ox
They flay’d and dress’d around the fun’ral pyre;
Of all the beasts Achilles took the fat,
And cover’d o’er the corpse from head to foot,
And heap’d the slaughter’d carcases around;
Then jars of honey plac’d, and fragrant oils,
Resting upon the couch; next, groaning loud,
Four pow’rful horses on the pyre he threw;
Then, of nine dogs that at their master’s board
Had fed, he slaughter’d two upon his pyre;
Last, with the sword, by evil counsel sway’d,
Twelve noble youths he slew, the sons of Troy.
The fire’s devouring might he then applied,
And, groaning, on his lov’d companion call’d:

“All hail, Patroclus, though in Pluto’s realm!
All that I promis’d, lo! I now perform:
On twelve brave sons of Trojan sires, with thee,
The flames shall feed; but Hector, Priam’s son,
Not to the fire, but to the dogs I give.”

Such was Achilles’ threat, but him the dogs
Molested not; for Venus, night and day
Daughter of Jove, the rav’ning dogs restrain’d;
And all the corpse o’erlaid with roseate oil,
Ambrosial, that though dragg’d along the earth,
The noble dead might not receive a wound.
Apollo too a cloudy veil from Heav’n
Spread o’er the plain, and cover’d all the space
Where lay the dead, nor let the blazing sun
The flesh upon his limbs and muscles parch.
Yet burnt not up Patroclus’ fun’ral pyre;
Then a fresh thought Achilles’ mind conceiv’d:
Standing apart, on both the Winds he call’d,
Boreas and Zephyrus, and added vows
Of costly sacrifice; and pouring forth
Libations from a golden goblet, pray’d
Their presence, that the wood might haste to burn,
And with the fire consume the dead; his pray’r
Swift Iris heard, and bore it to the Winds.
They in the hall of gusty Zephyrus
Were gather’d round the feast; in haste appearing,
Swift Iris on the stony threshold stood.
They saw, and rising all, besought her each
To sit beside him; she with their requests
Refus’d compliance, and address’d them thus:

“No seat for me; for I o’er th’ ocean stream
From hence am bound to Æthiopia’s shore,
To share the sacred feast, and hecatombs,
Which there they offer to th’ immortal Gods;
But, Boreas, thee, and loud-voic’d Zephyrus,
With vows of sacrifice, Achilles calls
To fan the fun’ral pyre, whereon is laid
Patroclus, mourn’d by all the host of Greece.”

She said, and vanish’d; they, with rushing sound,
Rose, and before them drove the hurrying clouds:
Soon o’er the sea they swept; the stirring breeze
Ruffled the waves; the fertile shores of Troy
They reach’d, and falling on the fun’ral pyre,
Loud roar’d the crackling flames; they all night long
With current brisk together fann’d the fire.
All night Achilles from a golden bowl
Drew forth, and, in his hand a double cup,
The wine outpouring, moisten’d all the earth,
Still calling on his lost Patroclus’ shade.
As mourns a father o’er a youthful son,
Whose early death hath wrung his parents’ hearts;
So mourn’d Achilles o’er his friend’s remains,
Prostrate beside the pyre, and groan’d aloud.
But when the star of Lucifer appear’d,
The harbinger of light, whom following close
Spreads o’er the sea the saffron-robed morn,
Then pal’d the smould’ring fire, and sank the flame;
And o’er the Thracian sea, that groan’d and heav’d
Beneath their passage, home the Winds return’d;
And weary, from the pyre a space withdrawn,
Achilles lay, o’ercome by gentle sleep.

Anon, awaken’d by the tramp and din
Of crowds that follow’d Atreus’ royal son,
He sat upright, and thus address’d his speech:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye chiefs of Greece,
Far as the flames extended, quench we first
With ruddy wine the embers of the pyre;
And of Menoetius’ son, Patroclus, next
With care distinguishing, collect the bones;
Nor are they hard to know; for in the midst
He lay, while round the edges of the pyre,
Horses and men commix’d, the rest were burnt.
Let these, between a double layer of fat
Enclos’d, and in a golden urn remain,
Till I myself shall in the tomb be laid;
And o’er them build a mound, not over-large,
But of proportions meet; in days to come,
Ye Greeks, who after me shall here remain,
Complete the work, and build it broad and high.”

Thus spoke Achilles; they his words obey’d:
Far as the flames had reach’d, and thickly strown
The embers lay, they quench’d with ruddy wine;
Then tearfully their gentle comrade’s bones
Collected, and with double layers of fat
Enclos’d, and in a golden urn encas’d;
Then in the tent they laid them, overspread
With veil of linen fair; then meting out
Th’ allotted space, the deep foundations laid
Around the pyre, and o’er them heap’d the earth.
Their task accomplished, all had now withdrawn;
But Peleus’ son the vast assembly stay’d,
And bade them sit; then, prizes of the games,
Tripods and caldrons from the tents he brought,
And noble steeds, and mules, and sturdy steers,
And women fair of form, and iron hoar.

First, for the contest of the flying cars
The prizes he display’d: a woman fair,
Well skill’d in household cares; a tripod vast,
Two-handled, two and twenty measures round;
These both were for the victor: for the next,
A mare, unbroken, six years old, in foal
Of a mule colt; the third, a caldron bright,
Capacious of four measures, white and pure,
By fire as yet untarnish’d; for the fourth,
Of gold two talents; for the fifth, a vase
With double cup, untouch’d by fire, he gave.
Then, standing up, he thus address’d the Greeks:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
Before ye are the prizes, which await
The contest of the cars; but if, ye Greeks,
For any other cause these games were held,
I to my tent should bear the foremost prize;
For well ye know how far my steeds excel,
Steeds of immortal race, which Neptune gave
To Peleus, he to me, his son, transferr’d.
But from the present strife we stand aloof,
My horses and myself; they now have lost
The daring courage and the gentle hand
Of him who drove them, and with water pure
Wash’d oft their manes, and bath’d with fragrant oil.
For him they stand and mourn, with drooping heads
Down to the ground, their hearts with sorrow fill’d;
But ye in order range yourselves, who boast
Your well-built chariots and your horses’ speed.”

He said: up sprang the eager charioteers;
The first of all, Eumelus, King of men,
Son of Admetus, matchless charioteer;
Next, Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed,
With Trojan horses, from Æneas won,
When by Apollo’s aid himself escap’d;
Then Heav’n-born Menelaus, Atreus’ son,
Two flying coursers harness’d to his car;
His own, Podargus, had for yokefellow
Æthe, a mare by Agamemnon lent:
Her, Echepolus to Atrides gave,
Anchises’ son, that to the wars of Troy
He might not be compell’d, but safe at home
Enjoy his ease; for Jove had bless’d his store
With ample wealth, in Sicyon’s wide domain.
Her now he yok’d, impatient for the course.
The fourth, Antilochus, the gallant son
Of Nestor, son of Neleus, mighty chief,
Harness’d his sleek-skinn’d steeds; of Pylian race
Were they who bore his car; to him, his sire
Sage counsel pour’d in understanding ears:

“Antilochus, though young in years thou art,
Yet Jove and Neptune love thee, and have well
Instructed thee in horsemanship; of me
Thou need’st no counsel; skill’d around the goal
To whirl the chariot; but thou hast, of all,
The slowest horses: whence I augur ill.
But though their horses have the speed of thine,
In skill not one of them surpasses thee.
Then thou, dear boy, exert thine ev’ry art,
That so thou mayst not fail to gain a prize.
By skill, far more than strength, the woodman fells
The sturdy oak; by skill the steersman guides
His flying ship across the dark-blue sea,
Though shatter’d by the blast; ’twixt charioteer
And charioteer ’tis skill that draws the line.
One, vainly trusting to his coursers’ speed,
Drives reckless here and there; o’er all the course,
His horses, unrestrain’d, at random run.
Another, with inferior horses far,
But better skill’d, still fixing on the goal
His eye, turns closely round, nor overlooks
The moment when to draw the rein; but holds
His steady course, and on the leader waits.
A mark I give thee now, thou canst not miss:
There stands a wither’d trunk, some six feet high,
Of oak, or pine, unrotted by the rain;
On either side have two white stones been plac’d,
Where meet two roads; and all around there lies
A smooth and level course; here stood perchance
The tomb of one who died long years ago;
Or former generations here have plac’d,
As now Achilles hath decreed, a goal.
There drive, as only not to graze the post;
And leaning o’er the wicker body, leave
Close on the left the stones; thine offside horse
Then urge with voice and whip, and slack his rein,
And let the nearside horse so closely graze,
As that thy nave may seem to touch, the goal:
But yet beware, lest, striking on the stone,
Thy steeds thou injure, and thy chariot break,
A source of triumph to thy rivals all,
Of shame to thee; but thou sage caution use;
For, following, if thou make the turn the first,
Not one of all shall pass thee, or o’ertake;
Not though Arion’s self were in the car,
Adrastus’ flying steed, of heav’nly race,
Nor those which here Laomedon possess’d.”

This said, and to his son his counsels giv’n,
The aged Nestor to his seat withdrew.
Fifth in the lists Meriones appear’d.
They mounted on their cars, and cast their lots:
Achilles shook the helmet; first leaped forth
The lot of Nestor’s son, Antilochus;
Next came the King Eumelus; after whom
The valiant Menelaus, Atreus’ son;
The fourth, Meriones; and last of all,
But ablest far, Tydides drew his place.
They stood in line; Achilles pointed out,
Ear on the level plain, the distant goal;
And there in charge the godlike Phoenix plac’d,
His father’s ancient follower, to observe
The course assign’d, and true report to make.
Then all at once their whips they rais’d, and urg’d
By rein, and hand, and voice, their eager steeds.
They from the ships pursued their rapid course
Athwart the distant plain; beneath their chests
Rose like a cloud, or hurricane, the dust;
Loose floated on the breeze their ample manes;
The cars now skimm’d along the fertile ground,
Now bounded high in air; the charioteers
Stood up aloft, and ev’ry bosom beat
With hope of vict’ry; each with eager shout
Cheering his steeds, that scour’d the dusty plain.
But when, the farthest limits of the course
Attain’d, they turn’d beside the hoary sea,
Strain’d to their utmost speed, were plainly seen
The qualities of each; then in the front
Appear’d Eumelus’ flying mares, and next
The Trojan horses of Tydides came:
Nor these were far behind, but following close
They seem’d in act to leap upon the car.
Eumelus, on his neck and shoulders broad,
Felt their warm breath; for o’er him, as they flew,
Their heads were downward bent; and now, perchance,
Had he or pass’d, or made an even race,
But that, incens’d with valiant Diomed,
Apollo wrested from his hands the whip.
Then tears of anger from his eyelids fell,
As gaining more and more the mares he saw,
While, urg’d no more, his horses slack’d their speed.
But Pallas mark’d Apollo’s treach’rous wile;
And hasting to the chief, restor’d his whip,
And to his horses strength and courage gave.
The Goddess then Admetus’ son pursued,
And snapp’d his chariot yoke; the mares, releas’d,
Swerv’d from the track; the pole upon the ground
Lay loosen’d from the car; and he himself
Beside the wheel was from the chariot hurl’d.
From elbows, mouth, and nose, the skin was torn;
His forehead crush’d and batter’d in; his eyes
Were fill’d with tears, and mute his cheerful voice.
Tydides turn’d aside, and far ahead
Of all the rest, pass’d on; for Pallas gave
His horses courage, and his triumph will’d.
Next him, the fair-hair’d Menelaus came,
The son of Atreus; but Antilochus
Thus to his father’s horses call’d aloud:

“Forward, and stretch ye to your utmost speed;
I ask you not with those of Diomed
In vain to strive, whom Pallas hath endued
With added swiftness, and his triumph will’d;
But haste ye, and o’ertake Atrides’ car,
Nor be by Æthe, by a mare, disgrac’d.
Why, my brave horses, why be left behind?
This too I warn ye, and will make it good:
No more at Nestor’s hand shall ye receive
Your provender, but with the sword be slain,
If by your faults a lower prize be ours;
Then rouse ye now, and put forth all your speed,
And I will so contrive, as not to fail
Of slipping past them in the narrow way.”

He said; the horses, of his voice in awe,
Put forth their pow’rs awhile; before them soon
Antilochus the narrow pass espied.
It was a gully, where the winter’s rain
Had lain collected, and had broken through
A length of road, and hollow’d out the ground:
There Menelaus held his cautious course.
Fearing collision; but Antilochus,
Drawing his steeds a little from the track,
Bore down upon him sideways: then in fear,
The son of Atreus to Antilochus
Shouted aloud, “Antilochus, thou driv’st
Like one insane; hold in awhile thy steeds;
Here is no space; where wider grows the road,
There thou mayst pass; but here, thou wilt but cause
Our cars to clash, and bring us both to harm.”

He said; but madlier drove Antilochus,
Plying the goad, as though he heard him not.

Far as a discus’ flight, by some stout youth,
That tests his vigour, from the shoulder hurl’d,
So far they ran together, side by side:
Then dropp’d Atrides’ horses to the rear,
For he himself forbore to urge their speed,
Lest, meeting in the narrow pass, the cars
Should be o’erthrown, and they themselves, in haste
To gain the vict’ry, in the dust be roll’d.
Then thus, reproachful, to Antilochus:

“Antilochus, thou most perverse of men!
Beshrew thy heart! we Greeks are much deceiv’d
Who give thee fame for wisdom! yet e’en now
Thou shalt not gain, but on thine oath, the prize.”

He said, and to his horses call’d aloud:
“Slack not your speed, nor, as defeated, mourn;
Their legs and feet will sooner tire than yours,
For both are past the vigour of their youth.”
Thus he; the horses, of his voice in awe,
Put forth their pow’rs, and soon the leaders near’d.

Meanwhile the chieftains, seated in the ring,
Look’d for the cars, that scour’d the dusty plain.
The first to see them was Idomeneus,
The Cretan King; for he, without the ring,
Was posted high aloft; and from afar
He heard and knew the foremost horseman’s voice;
Well too he knew the gallant horse that led,
All bay the rest, but on his front alone
A star of white, full-orbed as the moon:
Then up he rose, and thus the Greeks address’d:

“O friends, the chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Can ye too see, or I alone, the cars?
A diff’rent chariot seems to me in front,
A diff’rent charioteer; and they who first
Were leading, must have met with some mischance.
I saw them late, ere round the goal they turn’d,
But see them now no more; though all around
My eyes explore the wide-spread plain of Troy.
Perchance the charioteer has dropp’d the reins,
Or round the goal he could not hold the mares;
Perchance has miss’d the turn, and on the plain
Is lying now beside his broken car,
While from the course his mettled steeds have flown.
Stand up, and look yourselves; I cannot well
Distinguish; but to me it seems a chief,
Who reigns o’er Greeks, though of Ætolian race,
The son of Tydeus, valiant Diomed.”

Sharply Oileus’ active son replied:
“Idomeneus, why thus, before the time,
So rashly speak? while the high-stepping steeds
Are speeding yet across the distant plain.
Thine eyes are not the youngest in the camp,
Nor look they out the sharpest from thy head;
But thou art ever hasty in thy speech,
And ill becomes thee this precipitance.
Since others are there here, thy betters far.
The same are leading now, that led at first,
Eumelus’ mares; ’tis he that holds the reins.”

To whom in anger thus the Cretan chief:
“Ajax, at wrangling good, in judgment naught,
And for aught else, among the chiefs of Greece
Of small account—so stubborn is thy soul;
Wilt thou a tripod or a caldron stake,
And Agamemnon, Atreus’ son, appoint
The umpire to decide whose steeds are first?
So shalt thou gain thy knowledge at thy cost.”

He said; up sprang Oileus’ active son,
In anger to reply; and farther yet
Had gone the quarrel, but Achilles’ self
Stood up, and thus the rival chiefs address’d:

“Forbear, both Ajax and Idomeneus,
This bitter interchange of wordy war;
It is not seemly; and yourselves, I know,
Another would condemn, who so should speak.
But stay ye here, and seated in the ring,
Their coming wait; they, hurrying to the goal,
Will soon be here; and then shall each man know
Whose horses are the second, whose the first.”

Thus he; but Tydeus’ son drew near, his lash
Still laid upon his horses’ shoulder-points;
As lightly they, high-stepping, scour’d the plain.
Still on the charioteer the dust was flung;
As close upon the flying-footed steeds
Follow’d the car with gold and tin inlaid;
And lightly, as they flew along, were left
Impress’d the wheel-tracks on the sandy plain.
There in the midst he stood, the sweat profuse
Down-pouring from his horses’ heads and chests;
Down from the glitt’ring car he leap’d to earth,
And lean’d his whip against the chariot yoke;
Nor long delay’d the valiant Sthenelus,
But eagerly sprang forth to claim the prize;
Then to his brave companions gave in charge
To lead away the woman, and to bear
The tripod, while himself unyok’d the steeds.

Nest came the horses of Antilochus,
Who had by stratagem, and not by speed,
O’er Menelaus triumph’d; yet e’en so
Atrides’ flying coursers press’d him hard;
For but so far as from the chariot-wheel
A horse, when harness’d to a royal car;
Whose tail, back-streaming, with the utmost hairs
Brushes the felloes; close before the wheel,
Small space between, he scours the wide-spread plain:
So far was Menelaus in the rear
Of Nestor’s son; at first, a discus’ cast
Between them lay; but rapidly his ground
He gain’d—so well the speed and courage serv’d
Of Æthe, Agamemnon’s beauteous mare;
And, but a little farther were the course,
Had pass’d him by, nor left the race in doubt.
Behind the noble son of Atreus came,
A jav’lin’s flight apart, Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus:
His were the slowest horses, and himself
The least experienc’d in the rapid race.
Dragging his broken car, came last of all,
His horses driv’n in front, Admetus’ son;
Achilles swift of foot with pity saw,
And to the Greeks his winged words address’d:

“See where the best of all the last appears;
But let him take, as meet, the second prize;
The first belongs of right to Tydeus’ son.”

Thus he; they all assented to his words;
And, by the gen’ral voice of Greece, the mare
Had now been his; but noble Nestor’s son,
Antilochus, stood up, his right to claim,
And to Achilles, Peleus’ son, replied:
“Achilles, thou wilt do me grievous wrong,
If thou thy words accomplish; for my prize
Thou tak’st away, because mishap befell
His car and horses, by no fault of his;
Yet had he to th’ Immortals made his pray’r,
He surely had not thus been last of all.
But, pitying him, if so thy mind incline,
Thy tents contain good store of gold, and brass,
And sheep, and female slaves, and noble steeds;
For him, of these, hereafter mayst thou take
A prize of higher value; or e’en now,
And with th’ applause of all; but for the mare,
I will not give her up; and let who will
Stand forth, my own right hand shall guard my prize.”

He said; and smil’d Achilles swift of foot,
Delighted; for he lov’d the noble youth,
To whom his winged words he thus address’d:

“Antilochus, if such be thy request,
That for Eumelus I should add a prize,
This too I grant thee; and to him I give
My breastplate, from Asteropaeus won,
Of brass, around whose edge is roll’d a stream
Of shining tin; a gift of goodly price.”

He said, and bade Automedon, his friend
And comrade, bring the breastplate from his tent;
He went, and brought it; in Eumelus’ hand
He plac’d it; he with joy the gift receiv’d.
Then Menelaus, sad at heart, arose,
Burning with wrath against Antilochus;
And while the herald in the monarch’s hand
His royal sceptre plac’d, and bade the Greeks
Keep silence, thus the godlike hero spoke:

“Antilochus, till now reputed wise,
What hast thou done? thou hast impugn’d my skill,
And sham’d my horses, who hast brought thine own,
Inferior far, before them to the goal.
But come, ye chiefs and councillors of Greece,
Judge ye between us, fav’ring neither side:
That none of all the brass-clad Greeks may say
That Menelaus hath by false reports
O’erborne Antilochus, and holds his prize:
His horses fairly worsted, and himself
Triumphant only by superior pow’r.
Or come now, I myself will judgment give;
Nor deem I any Greek will find to blame
In my decision, for ’tis fair and just.
Antilochus, come forward, noble chief;
And standing, as ’tis meet, before the car
And horses, in thy hand the slender whip
Wherewith thou drov’st, upon the horses lay
Thy hand, and by Earth-shaking Neptune swear
That not of malice, and by set design,
Thou didst by fraud impede my chariot’s course.”

To whom Antilochus with prudent speech:
“Have patience with me yet; for I, O King,
O Menelaus, am thy junior far;
My elder and superior thee I own.
Thou know’st th’ o’er-eager vehemence of youth,
How quick in temper, and in judgment weak.
Set then thy heart at ease; the mare I won
I freely give; and if aught else of mine
Thou shouldst desire, would sooner give it all,
Than all my life be low’r’d, illustrious King,
In thine esteem, and sin against the Gods.”

Thus saying, noble Nestor’s son led forth,
And plac’d in Menelaus’ hands the mare:
The monarch’s soul was melted, like the dew
Which glitters on the ears of growing corn,
That bristle o’er the plain; e’en so thy soul,
O Menelaus, melted at his speech;
To whom were thus address’d thy winged words:

“Antilochus, at once I lay aside
My anger; thou art prudent, and not apt
To be thus led astray; but now thy youth
Thy judgment hath o’erpow’r’d; seek not henceforth
By trick’ry o’er thine elders to prevail.
To any other man of all the Greeks
I scarce so much had yielded; but for that
Thyself hast labour’d much, and much endur’d,
Thou, thy good sire, and brother, in my cause:
I yield me to thy pray’rs; and give, to boot,
The mare, though mine of right; that these may know
I am not of a harsh, unyielding mood.”

He said, and to Noemon gave in charge,
The faithful comrade of Antilochus,
The mare; himself the glitt’ring caldron took.
Of gold two talents, to the fourth assign’d,
Fourth in the race, Meriones receiv’d;
Still the fifth prize, a vase with double cup,
Remain’d; Achilles this to Nestor gave,
Before th’ assembled Greeks, as thus he spoke:

“Take this, old man, and for an heirloom keep,
In mem’ry of Patroclus’ fun’ral games,
Whom thou no more amid the Greeks shalt see.
Freely I give it thee; for thou no more
Canst box, or wrestle, or in sportive strife
The jav’lin throw, or race with flying feet;
For age with heavy hand hath bow’d thee down.”

He said, and plac’d it in his hand; th’ old man
Beceiv’d with joy the gift, and thus replied:

“All thou hast said, my son, is simple truth:
No firmness now my limbs and feet retain,
Nor can my arms with freedom, as of old,
Straight from the shoulder, right and left, strike out.
Oh that such youth and vigour yet were mine,
As when th’ Epeians in Buprasium held
The royal Amarynceus’ fun’ral games,
And when the monarch’s sons his prizes gave!
Then could not one of all th’ Epeian race,
Or Pylians, or Ætolians, vie with me.
In boxing, Clytomedes, Œnops’ son,
I vanquished; then Anchaeus, who stood up
To wrestle with me, I with ease o’erthrew;
Iphiclus I outran, though fleet of foot;
In hurling with the spear, with Phyleus strove,
And Polydorus, and surpass’d them both.
The sons of Actor in the chariot-race
Alone o’ercame me; as in number more,[8]
And grudging more my triumph, since remain’d,
This contest to reward, the richest prize.
They were twin brothers; one who held the reins,
Still drove, and drove; the other plied the whip.
Such was I once; but now must younger men
Engage in deeds like these; and I, the chief
Of heroes once, must bow to weary age.
But honour thou with fitting fun’ral games
Thy comrade: I accept, well-pleas’d, thy gift,
My heart rejoicing that thou still retain’st
Of me a kindly mem’ry, nor o’erlook’st
The place of honour, which among the Greeks
Belongs to me of right; for this, the Gods
Reward thee with a worthy recompense!”

He said; Achilles listen’d to the praise
Of Neleus’ son; then join’d the gen’ral throng.
Next, he set forth the prizes, to reward
The labours of the sturdy pugilists;
A hardy mule he tether’d in the ring,
Unbroken, six years old, most hard to tame;
And for the vanquished man, a double cup;
Then rose, and to the Greeks proclaim’d aloud:

“Thou son of Atreus, and ye well-greav’d Greeks,
For these we bid two champions brave stand forth.
And in the boxer’s manly toil contend;
And he, whose stern endurance Phoebus crowns
With vict’ry, recogniz’d by all the Greeks,
He to his tent shall lead the hardy mule;
The loser shall the double cup receive.”

He said; up sprang Epeius, tall and stout,
A boxer skill’d, the son of Panopeus,
Who laid his hand upon the mule, and said:

“Stand forth, if any care the cup to win;
The mule, methinks, no Greek can bear away
From me, who glory in the champion’s name.
Is’t not enough, that in the battle-field
I claim no special praise? ’tis not for man
In all things to excel; but this I say,
And will make good my words, who meets me here,
I mean to pound his flesh, and smash his bones.
See that his seconds be at hand, and prompt
To bear him from the ring, by me subdued.”

He said; they all in silence heard his speech:
Only Euryalus, a godlike chief,
Son of Mecistheus, Talaion’s son,
Stood forth opposing; he had once in Thebes
Join’d in the fun’ral games of Œdipus,
And there had vanquish’d all of Cadmian race.
On him attended valiant Diomed,
With cheering words, and wishes of success.
Around his waist he fasten’d first the belt,
Then gave the well-cut gauntlets for his hands.
Of wild bull’s hide. When both were thus equipp’d,
Into the centre of the ring they stepp’d:
There, face to face, with sinewy arms uprais’d,
They stood awhile, then clos’d; strong hand with hand
Mingling, in rapid interchange of blows.
Dire was the clatter of their jaws; the sweat
Pour’d forth, profuse, from ev’ry limb; then rush’d
Epeius on, and full upon the cheek,
Half turn’d aside, let fall a stagg’ring blow;
Nor stood Euryalus; but, legs and feet
Knock’d from beneath him, prone to earth he fell;
And as a fish, that flounders on the sand,
Thrown by rude Boreas on the weedy beach,
Till cover’d o’er by the returning wave;
So flounder’d he beneath that stunning blow.
But brave Epeius took him by the hand,
And rais’d him up; his comrades crowded round
And bore him from the field, with dragging steps,
Spitting forth clotted gore, his heavy head
Rolling from side to side; within his tent
They laid him down, unconscious; to the ring
Then back returning, bore away the cup.

Achilles next before the Greeks display’d
The prizes of the hardy wrestlers’ skill:
The victor’s prize, a tripod vast, fire-proof,
And at twelve oxen by the Greeks apprais’d;
And for the vanquish’d man, a female slave
Pric’d at four oxen, skill’d in household work.
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d,
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.”

He said; and straight uprose the giant form
Of Ajax Telamon; with him uprose
Ulysses, skill’d in ev’ry crafty wile.
Girt with the belt, within the ring they stood,
And each, with stalwart grasp, laid hold on each;
As stand two rafters of a lofty house,
Each propping each, by skilful architect
Design’d the tempest’s fury to withstand.
Creak’d their backbones beneath the tug and strain
Of those strong arms; their sweat pour’d down like rain;
And bloody weals of livid purple hue
Their sides and shoulders streak’d, as sternly they
For vict’ry and the well-wrought tripod strove.
Nor could Ulysses Ajax overthrow,
Nor Ajax bring Ulysses to the ground,
So stubbornly he stood; but when the Greeks
Were weary of the long-protracted strife,
Thus to Ulysses mighty Ajax spoke:
“Ulysses sage, Laertes’ godlike son,
Or lift thou me, or I will thee uplift:
The issue of our struggle rests with Jove.”

He said, and rais’d Ulysses from the ground;
Nor he his ancient craft remember’d not,
But lock’d his leg around, and striking sharp
Upon the hollow of the knee, the joint
Gave way; the giant Ajax backwards fell,
Ulysses on his breast; the people saw,
And marvell’d. Then in turn Ulysses strove
Ajax to lift; a little way he mov’d,
But fail’d to lift him fairly from, the ground;
Yet crook’d his knee, that both together fell,
And side by side, defil’d with dust, they lay.

And now a third encounter had they tried
But rose Achilles, and the combat stay’d:

“Forbear, nor waste your strength, in farther strife;
Ye both are victors; both then bear away
An equal meed of honour; and withdraw,
That other Greeks may other contests wage.”
Thus spoke Achilles: they his words obey’d,
And brushing off the dust, their garments donn’d.

The prizes of the runners, swift of foot,
Achilles next set forth; a silver bowl,
Six measures its content, for workmanship
Unmatch’d on earth, of Sidon’s costliest art
The product rare; thence o’er the misty sea
Brought by Phoenicians, who, in port arriv’d,
Gave it to Thoas; by Euneus last,
The son of Jason, to Patroclus paid,
In ransom of Lycaon, Priam’s son;
Which now Achilles, on his friend’s behalf,
Assign’d as his reward, whoe’er should prove
The lightest foot, and speediest in the race.
A steer, well fatten’d, was the second prize,
And half a talent, for the third, of gold.
He rose, and to the Greeks proclaim’d aloud,
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.”
He said: uprose Oileus’ active son;
Uprose Ulysses, skill’d in ev’ry wile,
And noble Nestor’s son, Antilochus,
Who all the youth in speed of foot surpass’d.
They stood in line: Achilles pointed out
The limits of the course; as from the goal
They stretch’d them to the race, Oileus’ son
First shot ahead; Ulysses following close;
Nor farther than the shuttle from the breast
Of some fair woman, when her outstretch’d arm
Has thrown the woof athwart the warp, and back
Withdraws it tow’rd her breast; so close behind
Ulysses press’d on Ajax, and his feet
Trod in his steps, ere settled yet the dust.
His breath was on his shoulders, as the plain
He lightly skimm’d; the Greeks with eager shouts
Still cheering, as he strain’d to win the prize.
But as they near’d the goal, Ulysses thus
To blue-ey’d Pallas made his mental pray’r:
“Now hear me, Goddess, and my feet befriend.”
Thus as he pray’d, his pray’r the Goddess heard,
And all his limbs with active vigour fill’d;
And, as they stretch’d their hands to seize the prize,
Tripp’d up by Pallas, Ajax slipp’d and fell,
Amid the offal of the lowing kine
Which o’er Patroclus Peleus’ son had slain.
His mouth and nostrils were with offal fill’d.
First in the race, Ulysses bore away
The silver bowl; the steer to Ajax fell;
And as upon the horn he laid his hand,
Sputt’ring the offal out, he call’d aloud:
“Lo, how the Goddess has my steps bewray’d,
Who guards Ulysses with a mother’s care.”
Thus as he spoke, loud laugh’d the merry Greeks.
Antilochus the sole remaining prize
Receiv’d, and, laughing, thus the Greeks address’d:

“I tell you, friends, but what yourselves do know,
How of the elder men th’ immortal Gods
Take special care; for Ajax’ years not much
Exceed mine own; but here we see a man,
One of a former age, and race of men;
A hale old man we call him; but for speed
Not one can match him, save Achilles’ self.”

Thus he, with praise implied of Peleus’ son;
To whom in answer thus Achilles spoke:

“Antilochus, not unobserv’d of me
Nor unrewarded shall thy praise remain:
To thy half talent add this second half.”

Thus saying, in his hand he plac’d the gold;
Antilochus with joy the gift receiv’d.

Next, in the ring the son of Peleus laid
A pond’rous spear, a helmet, and a shield,
The spoil Patroclus from Sarpedon won;
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d:

“For these we call upon two champions brave
To don their arms, their sharp-edg’d weapons grasp,
And public trial of their prowess make;
And he who first his rival’s flesh shall reach,
And, through his armour piercing, first draw blood,
He shall this silver-studded sword receive,
My trophy from Asteropaeus won,
Well-wrought, of Thracian metal; but the arms
In common property they both shall hold,
And in my tent a noble banquet share.”

He said; uprose great Ajax Telamon,
And Tydeus’ son, the valiant Diomed.
First, from the crowd apart, they donn’d their arms;
Then, eager for the fight, with haughty stare
Stood in the midst; the Greeks admiring gaz’d.
When, each approaching other, near they came,
Thrice rush’d they on, and thrice in combat clos’d.
Then through the buckler round of Diomed
Great Ajax drove his spear; nor reach’d the point
Tydides’ body, by the breastplate stay’d:
While, aim’d above the mighty shield’s defence,
His glitt’ring weapon flash’d at Ajax’ throat.
For Ajax fearing, shouted then the Greeks
To cease the fight, and share alike the prize;
But from Achilles’ hand the mighty sword,
With belt and scabbard, Diomed receiv’d.

Next in the ring the son of Peleus plac’d
A pond’rous mass of iron, as a quoit
Once wielded by Eetion’s giant strength,
But to the ships with other trophies borne,
When by Achilles’ hand Eetion fell.
Then rose, and loudly to the Greeks proclaim’d:
“Stand forth, whoe’er this contest will essay.
This prize who wins, though widely may extend
His fertile fields, for five revolving years
It will his wants supply; nor to the town
For lack of iron, with this mass in store,
Need he his shepherd or his ploughman send.”

He said; and valiant Polypoetes rose,
Epeius, and Leonteus’ godlike strength,
And mighty Ajax, son of Telamon.
In turns they took their stand; Epeius first
Uprais’d the pond’rous mass, and through the air
Hurl’d it, amid the laughter of the Greeks.
Next came Leonteus, scion true of Mars;
The third was Ajax; from whose stalwart hand
Beyond the farthest mark the missile flew.
But when the valiant Polypoetes took
The quoit in hand, far as a herdsman throws
His staff, that, whirling, flies among the herd;
So far beyond the ring’s extremest bound
He threw the pond’rous mass; loud were the shouts;
And noble Polypoetes’ comrades rose,
And to the ships the monarch’s gift convey’d.

The archers’ prizes next, of iron hoar,
Ten sturdy axes, double-edg’d, he plac’d,
And single hatchets ten; then far away
Rear’d on the sand a dark-prow’d vessel’s mast,
On which, with slender string, a tim’rous dove
Was fasten’d by the foot, the archers’ mark;
That who should strike the dove should to his tent
The axes bear away; but who the string
Should sever, but should fail to strike the bird,
As less in skill, the hatchets should receive.
Thus spoke Achilles; straight uprose the might
Of royal Teucer, and Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus.
They in a brass-bound helmet shook the lots.
The first was Teucer’s; with impetuous force
He shot; but vow’d not to the Archer-King
Of firstling lambs a solemn hecatomb.
The dove he struck not, for the Archer-God
Withheld his aid; but close beside her foot
The arrow sever’d the retaining string.
The bird releas’d, soar’d heav’nward; while the string
Dropp’d, from the mast suspended, tow’rds the earth,
And loudly shouted their applause the Greeks.
Then snatch’d Meriones in haste the bow
From Teucer’s hand; his own already held
His arrow, pointed straight; he drew the string,
And to the far-destroying King he vow’d
Of firstling lambs a solemn hecatomb.
Aloft amid the clouds he mark’d the dove,
And struck her, as she soar’d, beneath the wing;
Right through the arrow pass’d; and to the earth
Returning, fell beside Meriones.
The bird upon the dark-prow’d vessel’s mast
Lighted awhile; anon, with drooping head,
And pinions flutt’ring vain, afar she fell,
Lifeless; th’ admiring crowd with wonder gaz’d.
Meriones the axes bore away,
While Teucer to the ships the hatchets bore.

Last, in the ring the son of Peleus laid
A pond’rous spear, and caldron, burnish’d bright,
Pric’d at an ox’s worth, untouch’d by fire,
For those who with the jav’lin would contend.
Uprose then Agamemnon, King of men,
The son of Atreus, and Meriones,
The faithful follower of Idomeneus:
But Peleus’ godlike son address’d them thus:

“How far, Atrides, thou excell’st us all,
And with the jav’lin what thy pow’r and skill
Pre-eminent, we know; take thou this prize,
And bear it to thy ships; and let us give
To brave Meriones the brazen spear;
If so it please thee, such were my advice.”

He said; and Agamemnon, King of men,
Assenting, gave to brave Meriones
The brazen spear; while in Talthybius’ care,
His herald, plac’d the King his noble prize.



ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.


The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector’s body. Jupiter
sends Thetis to Achilles to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris
to Priam, to encourage him to go in person, and treat for it. The old
king, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for
the journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets
forth in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the
charge of Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young
man, and conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation
on the way. Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his
feet, and begs for the body of his son; Achilles, moved with
compassion, grants his request, detains him one night in his tent, and
the next morning sends him home with the body; the Trojans run out to
meet him. The lamentation of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the
solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of
Hector lies in the tent of Achilles. And as many more are spent in the
truce allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles’ camp,
and partly in Troy.

BOOK XXIV.

The games were ended, and the multitude
Amid the ships their sev’ral ways dispers’d:
Some to their supper, some to gentle sleep
Yielding, delighted; but Achilles still
Mourn’d o’er his lov’d companion; not on him
Lighted all-conqu’ring sleep, but to and fro
Restless he toss’d, and on Patroclus thought,
His vigour and his courage; all the deeds
They two together had achiev’d; the toils,
The perils they had undergone, amid
The strife of warriors, and the angry waves.
Stirr’d by such mem’ries, bitter tears he shed;
Now turning on his side, and now again
Upon his back; then prone upon his face;
Then starting to his feet, along the shore
All objectless, despairing, would he roam;
Nor did the morn, above the sea appearing,
Unmark’d of him arise; his flying steeds
He then would harness, and, behind the car
The corpse of Hector trailing in the dust,
Thrice make the circuit of Patroclus’ tomb;
Then would he turn within his tent to rest,
Leaving the prostrate corpse with dust defil’d;
But from unseemly marks the valiant dead
Apollo guarded, who with pity view’d
The hero, though in death; and round him threw
His golden aegis; nor, though dragg’d along,
Allow’d his body to receive a wound.

Thus foully did Achilles in his rage
Misuse the mighty dead; the blessed Gods
With pitying grief beheld the sight, and urg’d
That Hermes should by stealth the corpse remove.
The counsel pleas’d the rest; but Juno still,
And Neptune, and the blue-ey’d Maid, retain’d
The hatred, unappeas’d, with which of old
Troy and her King and people they pursued;
Since Paris to the rival Goddesses,
Who to his sheepfold came, gave deep offence,
Preferring her who brought him in return
The fatal boon of too successful love.
But when the twelfth revolving day was come,
Apollo thus th’ assembled Gods address’d:
“Shame on ye, Gods, ungrateful! have ye not,
At Hector’s hand, of bulls and choicest goats
Receiv’d your off’rings meet? and fear ye now
E’en his dead corpse to save, and grant his wife,
His mother, and his child, his aged sire
And people, to behold him, and to raise
His fun’ral pile, and with due rites entomb?
But fell Achilles all your aid commands;
Of mind unrighteous, and inflexible
His stubborn heart; his thoughts are all of blood;
E’en as a lion, whom his mighty strength
And dauntless courage lead to leap the fold,
And ’mid the trembling flocks to seize his prey;
E’en so Achilles hath discarded ruth,
And conscience, arbiter of good and ill.
A man may lose his best-lov’d friend, a son,
Or his own mother’s son, a brother dear:
He mourns and weeps, but time his grief allays,
For fate to man a patient mind hath giv’n:
But godlike Hector’s body, after death,
Achilles, unrelenting, foully drags,
Lash’d to his car, around his comrade’s tomb.
This is not to his praise; though brave he be,
Yet thus our anger he may justly rouse,
Who in his rage insults the senseless clay.”

To whom, indignant, white-arm’d Juno thus:
“Some show of reason were there in thy speech,
God of the silver bow, could Hector boast
Of equal dignity with Peleus’ son.
A mortal one, and nurs’d at woman’s breast;
The other, of a Goddess born, whom I
Nurtur’d and rear’d, and to a mortal gave
In marriage; gave to Peleus, best belov’d
By all th’ Immortals, of the race of man.
Ye, Gods, attended all the marriage rites;
Thou too, companion base, false friend, wast there,
And, playing on thy lyre, didst share the feast.”

To whom the Cloud-compeller answer’d thus:
“Juno, restrain thy wrath; they shall not both
Attain like honour; yet was Hector once,
Of all the mortals that in Ilium dwell,
Dearest to all the Gods, and chief to me;
For never did he fail his gifts to bring.
And with, burnt-off’rings and libations due
My altars crown; such worship I receiv’d.
Yet shall bold Hector’s body, not without
The knowledge of Achilles, be remov’d;
For day and night his Goddess-mother keeps
Her constant watch beside him. Then, some God
Bid Thetis hither to my presence haste;
And I with prudent words will counsel her,
That so Achilles may at Priam’s hand
Large ransom take, and set brave Hector free.”

He said; and promptly on his errand sprang
The storm-swift Iris; in the dark-blue sea
She plung’d, midway ’twixt Imbros’ rugged shore
And Samos’ isle; the parting waters plash’d.
As down to ocean’s lowest depths she dropp’d,
Like to a plummet, which the fisherman
Lets fall, encas’d in wild bull’s horn, to bear
Destruction to the sea’s voracious tribes.
There found she Thetis in a hollow cave,
Around her rang’d the Ocean Goddesses:
She, in the midst, was weeping o’er the fate
Her matchless son awaiting, doom’d to die
Far from his home, on fertile plains of Troy.
Swift-footed Iris at her side appear’d,
And thus address’d her: “Hasten, Thetis; Jove,
Lord of immortal counsel, summons thee.”
To whom the silver-footed Goddess thus:
“What would with me the mighty King of Heav’n?
Press’d as I am with grief, I am asham’d
To mingle with the Gods; yet will I go:
Nor shall he speak in vain, whate’er his words.”

Thus as she spoke, her veil the Goddess took,
All black, than which none deeper could be found;
She rose to go; the storm-swift Iris led
The way before her; ocean’s parted waves
Around their path receded; to the beach
Ascending, upwards straight to Heav’n they sprang.
Th’ all-seeing son of Saturn there they found,
And rang’d around him all th’ immortal Gods.
Pallas made way; and by the throne of Jove
Sat Thetis, Juno proff’ring to her hand
A goblet fair of gold, and adding words
Of welcome; she the cup receiv’d, and drank.
Then thus began the sire of Gods and men:
“Thou, Thetis, sorrowing to Olympus com’st,
Borne down by ceaseless grief; I know it well;
Yet hear the cause for which I summon’d thee.
About Achilles, thy victorious son,
And valiant Hector’s body, for nine days
Hath contest been in Heav’n; and some have urg’d
That Hermes should by stealth the corpse remove.
This to Achilles’ praise I mean to turn,
And thus thy rev’rence and thy love retain.
Then haste thee to the camp, and to thy son
My message bear; tell him that all the Gods
Are fill’d with wrath; and I above the rest
Am angry, that beside the beaked ships,
He, mad with rage, the corpse of Hector keeps:
So may he fear me, and restore the dead.
Iris meantime to Priam I will send,
And bid him seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain his son’s release: and with him bring
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.”

He said; the silver-footed Queen obey’d;
Down from Olympus’ heights in haste she sped,
And sought her son; him found she in his tent,
Groaning with anguish, while his comrades round,
Plying their tasks, prepar’d the morning meal.
For them a goodly sheep, full-fleec’d, was slain.
Close by his side his Goddess-mother stood,
And gently touch’d him with her hand, and said,
“How long, my son, wilt thou thy soul consume
With grief and mourning, mindful nor of food
Nor sleep? nor dost thou wisely, to abstain
From woman’s love; for short thy time on earth:
Death and imperious fate are close at hand.
Hear then my words; a messenger from Jove
To thee I come, to tell thee that the Gods
Are fill’d with wrath, and he above the rest
Is angry, that beside the beaked ships
Thou, mad with rage, the corpse of Hector keep’st.
Then ransom take, and liberate the dead.”

To whom Achilles, swift of foot, replied:
“So be it; ransom let him bring, and bear
His dead away, if such the will of Jove.”

Thus, in the concourse of the ships, they two,
Mother and son, their lengthen’d converse held.

Then Saturn’s son to Iris gave command:
“Haste thee, swift Iris, from Olympus’ height,
To Troy, to royal Priam bear my words;
And bid him seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain his son’s release; and with him take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Alone, no Trojan with him, must he go;
Yet may a herald on his steps attend,
Some aged man, his smoothly-rolling car
And mules to drive; and to the city back
To bring his dead, whom great Achilles slew.
Nor let the fear of death disturb his mind:
Hermes shall with him, as his escort, go,
And to Achilles’ presence safely bring.
Arriv’d within the tent, nor he himself
Will slay him, but from others will protect.
Not ignorant is he, nor void of sense,
Nor disobedient to the Gods’ behest
But will with pitying eyes his suppliant view.”

He said; and on his errand sped in haste
The storm-swift Iris; when to Priam’s house
She came, the sounds of wailing met her ear.
Within the court, around their father, sat
His sons, their raiment all bedew’d with tears;
And in the midst, close cover’d with his robe,
Their sire, his head and neck with dirt defil’d,
Which, wallowing on the earth, himself had heap’d,
With his own hands, upon his hoary head.
Throughout the house his daughters loudly wail’d
In mem’ry of the many and the brave
Who lay in death, by Grecian warriors slain.
Beside him stood the messenger of Jove,
And whisper’d, while his limbs with terror shook:
“Fear nothing, Priam, son of Dardanus,
Nor let thy mind be troubled; not for ill,
But here on kindly errand am I sent:
To thee I come, a messenger from Jove,
Who from on high looks down on thee with eyes
Of pitying love; he bids thee ransom home
The godlike Hector’s corpse; and with thee take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Alone, no Trojan with thee, must thou go;
Yet may a herald on thy steps attend,
Some aged man, thy smoothly-rolling car
And mules to drive, and to the city back
To bring thy dead, whom great Achilles slew.
Nor let the fear of death disturb thy mind:
Hermes shall with thee, as thine escort, go,
And to Achilles’ presence safely bring.
Arriv’d within the tent, nor he himself
Will slay thee, but from others will protect;
Not ignorant is he, nor void of sense,
Nor disobedient to the Gods’ behest,
But will with pitying eyes his suppliant view.”

Swift-footed Iris said, and vanish’d straight:
He to his sons commandment gave, the mules
To yoke beneath the smoothly-rolling car,
And on the axle fix the wicker seat.
Himself the lofty cedar chamber sought,
Fragrant, high-roof’d, with countless treasures stor’d;
And call’d to Hecuba his wife, and said,
“Good wife, a messenger from Jove hath come,
Who bids me seek the Grecian ships, and there
Obtain my son’s release; and with me take
Such presents as may melt Achilles’ heart.
Say then, what think’st thou? for my mind inclines
To seek the ships within the Grecian camp.”

So he; but Hecuba lamenting cried,
“Alas, alas! where are thy senses gone?
And where the wisdom, once of high repute
’Mid strangers, and ’mid those o’er whom thou reign’st?
How canst thou think alone to seek the ships,
Ent’ring his presence, who thy sons hath slain,
Many and brave? an iron heart is thine!
Of that bloodthirsty and perfidious man,
If thou within the sight and reach shalt come,
No pity will he feel, no rev’rence show:
Rather remain we here apart and mourn;
For him, when at his birth his thread of life
Was spun by fate, ’twas destin’d that afar
From home and parents, he should glut the maw
Of rav’ning dogs, by that stern warrior’s tent,
Whose inmost heart I would I could devour:
Such for my son were adequate revenge,
Whom not in ignominious flight he slew;
But standing, thoughtless of escape or flight,
For Trojan men and Troy’s deep-bosom’d dames.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“Seek not to hinder me; nor be thyself
A bird of evil omen in my house;
For thou shalt not persuade me. If indeed
This message had been brought by mortal man,
Prophet, or seer, or sacrificing priest,
I should have deem’d it false, and laugh’d to scorn
The idle tale; but now (for I myself
Both saw and heard the Goddess) I must go;
Nor unfulfill’d shall be the words I speak:
And if indeed it be my fate to die
Beside the vessels of the brass-clad Greeks,
I am content! by fierce Achilles’ hand
Let me be slain, so once more in my arms
I hold my boy, and give my sorrow vent.”
Then raising up the coffer’s polish’d lid,
He chose twelve gorgeous shawls, twelve single cloaks.
As many rugs, as many splendid robes,
As many tunics; then of gold he took
Ten talents full; two tripods, burnish’d bright,
Four caldrons; then a cup of beauty rare,
A rich possession, which the men of Thrace
Had giv’n, when there he went ambassador;
E’en this he spar’d not, such his keen desire
His son to ransom. From the corridor
With angry words he drove the Trojans all:

“Out with ye, worthless rascals, vagabonds!
Have ye no griefs at home, that here ye come
To pester me? or is it not enough
That Jove with deep affliction visits me,
Slaying my bravest son? ye to your cost
Shall know his loss: since now that he is gone,
The Greeks shall find you easier far to slay.
But may my eyes be clos’d in death, ere see
The city sack’d, and utterly destroy’d.”

He said, and with his staff drove out the crowd;
Before the old man’s anger fled they all;
Then to his sons in threat’ning tone he cried;
To Paris, Helenus, and Agathon,
Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites brave,
Deiphobus, and bold Hippothous,
And godlike Dius; all these nine with threats
And angry taunts the aged sire assail’d:
“Haste, worthless sons, my scandal and my shame!
Would that ye all beside the Grecian ships
In Hector’s stead had died! Oh woe is me,
Who have begotten sons, in all the land
The best and bravest; now remains not one;
Mestor, and Troilus, dauntless charioteer,
And Hector, who a God ’mid men appear’d,
Nor like a mortal’s offspring, but a God’s:
All these hath Mars cut off; and left me none,
None but the vile and refuse; liars all,
Vain skipping coxcombs, in the dance alone,
And in nought else renown’d; base plunderers,
From their own countrymen, of lambs and kids.
When, laggards, will ye harness me the car
Equipp’d with all things needed for the way?”

He said; they quail’d beneath their father’s wrath,
And brought the smoothly-running mule-wain out,
Well-fram’d, new-built; and fix’d the wicker seat;
Then from the peg the mule-yoke down they took,
Of boxwood wrought, with boss and rings complete;
And with the yoke, the yoke-band brought they forth,
Nine cubits long; and to the polish’d pole
At the far end attach’d; the breast-rings then
Fix’d to the pole-piece: and on either side
Thrice round the knob the leathern thong they wound.
And bound it fast, and inward turn’d the tongue.
Then the rich ransom, from the chambers brought,
Of Hector’s head, upon the wain they pil’d;
And yok’d the strong-hoof’d mules, to harness train’d,
The Mysians’ splendid present to the King:
To Priam’s car they harness’d then the steeds,
Which he himself at polish’d manger fed.

Deep thoughts revolving, in the lofty halls
Were met the herald and the aged King,
When Hecuba with troubled mind drew near;
In her right hand a golden cup she bore
Of luscious wine, that ere they took their way
They to the Gods might due libations pour;
Before the car she stood, and thus she spoke:
“Take, and to father Jove thine off’ring pour,
And pray that he may bring thee safely home
From all thy foes; since sore against my will
Thou needs wilt venture to the ships of Greece.
Then to Idaean Jove, the cloud-girt son
Of Saturn, who th’ expanse of Troy surveys,
Prefer thy pray’r, beseeching him to send,
On thy right hand, a winged messenger,
The bird he loves the best, of strongest flight;
That thou thyself mayst see and know the sign,
And, firm in faith, approach the ships of Greece.
But should all-seeing Jove the sign withhold,
Then not with my consent shouldst thou attempt,
Whate’er thy wish, to reach the Grecian ships.”

To whom, in answer, godlike Priam thus:
“O woman, I refuse not to obey
Thy counsel; good it is to raise the hands
In pray’r to Heav’n, and Jove’s protection seek.”
The old man said; and bade th’ attendant pour
Pure water on his hands; with ewer she,
And basin, stood beside him: from his wife,
The due ablutions made, he took the cup;
Then in the centre of the court he stood,
And as he pour’d the wine, look’d up to Heav’n,
And thus with voice uplifted pray’d aloud:
“O father Jove, who rul’st on Ida’s height,
Most great, most glorious! grant that I may find
Some pity in Achilles’ heart; and send,
On my right hand, a winged messenger,
The bird thou lov’st the best, of strongest flight,
That I myself may see and know the sign,
And, firm in faith, approach the ships of Greece.”

Thus as he pray’d, the Lord of counsel heard;
And sent forthwith an eagle, feather’d king,
Dark bird of chase, and Dusky thence surnam’d:
Wide as the portals, well secur’d with bolts,
That guard some wealthy monarch’s lofty hall,
On either side his ample pinions spread.
On the right hand appear’d he, far above
The city soaring; they the fav’ring sign
With joy beheld, and ev’ry heart was cheer’d.
Mounting his car in haste, the aged King
Drove thro’ the court, and thro’ the echoing porch;
The mules in front, by sage Idaeus driv’n,
That drew the four-wheel’d wain; behind them came
The horses, down the city’s steep descent
Urg’d by th’ old man to speed; the crowd of friends
That follow’d mourn’d for him, as doom’d to death.
Descended from the city to the plain,
His sons and sons-in-law to Ilium took
Their homeward way; advancing o’er the plain
They two escap’d not Jove’s all-seeing eye;
Pitying he saw the aged sire; and thus
At once to Hermes spoke, his much-lov’d son:
“Hermes, for thou in social converse lov’st
To mix with men, and hear’st whome’er thou wilt;
Haste thee, and Priam to the Grecian ships
So lead, that none of all the Greeks may see
Ere at Achilles’ presence he attain.”

He said; nor disobey’d the heav’nly Guide;
His golden sandals on his feet he bound,
Ambrosial work; which bore him o’er the waves,
Swift as the wind, and o’er the wide-spread earth;
Then took his rod, wherewith he seals at will
The eyes of men, and wakes again from sleep.
This in his hand he bore, and sprang for flight.
Soon the wide Hellespont he reach’d, and Troy,
And pass’d in likeness of a princely youth,
In op’ning manhood, fairest term of life.

The twain had pass’d by Ilus’ lofty tomb,
And halted there the horses and the mules
Beside the margin of the stream to drink;
For darkness now was creeping o’er the earth:
When through the gloom the herald Hermes saw
Approaching near, to Priam thus he cried:
“O son of Dardanus, bethink thee well;
Of prudent counsel great is now our need.
A man I see, and fear he means us ill.
Say, with the horses shall we fly at once,
Or clasp his knees, and for his mercy sue?”
The old man heard, his mind confus’d with dread;
So grievously he fear’d, that ev’ry hair
Upon his bended limbs did stand on end;
He stood astounded; but the Guardian-God
Approach’d, and took him by the hand, and said:
“Where, father, goest thou thus with horse and mule
In the still night, when men are sunk in sleep?
And fear’st thou not the slaughter-breathing Greeks,
Thine unrelenting foes, and they so near?
If any one of them should see thee now,
So richly laden in the gloom of night,
How wouldst thou feel? thou art not young thyself,
And this old man, thy comrade, would avail
But little to protect thee from assault.
I will not harm thee, nay will shield from harm,
For like my father’s is, methinks, thy face.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“’Tis as thou say’st, fair son; yet hath some God
Extended o’er me his protecting hand,
Who sends me such a guide, so opportune.
Bless’d are thy parents in a son so grac’d
In face and presence, and of mind so wise.”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“O father, well and wisely dost thou speak;
But tell me this, and truly: dost thou bear
These wealthy treasures to some foreign land,
That they for thee in safety may be stor’d?
Or have ye all resolv’d to fly from Troy
In fear, your bravest slain, thy gallant son,
Who never from the Greeks’ encounter flinch’d?”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“Who art thou, noble Sir, and what thy race,
That speak’st thus fairly of my hapless son?”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“Try me, old man; of godlike Hector ask;
For often in the glory-giving fight
These eyes have seen him; chief, when to the ships
The Greeks he drove, and with the sword destroy’d.
We gaz’d in wonder; from the fight restrain’d
By Peleus’ son, with Agamemnon wroth.
His follower I; one ship convey’d us both;
One of the Myrmidons I am; my sire
Polyctor, rich, but aged, e’en as thou.
Six sons he hath, besides myself, the sev’nth;
And I by lot was drafted for the war.
I from the ships am to the plain come forth;
For with the dawn of day the keen-ey’d Greeks
Will round the city marshal their array.
They chafe in idleness; the chiefs in vain
Strive to restrain their ardour for the fight.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“If of Achilles, Peleus’ son, thou art
Indeed a follower, tell me all the truth;
Lies yet my son beside the Grecian ships,
Or hath Achilles torn him limb from limb,
And to his dogs the mangled carcase giv’n?”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“On him, old man, nor dogs nor birds have fed,
But by the ship of Peleus’ son he lies
Within the tent; twelve days he there hath lain,
Nor hath corruption touch’d his flesh, nor worms,
That wont to prey on men in battle slain.
The corpse, indeed, with each returning morn,
Around his comrade’s tomb Achilles drags,
Yet leaves it still uninjur’d; thou thyself
Mightst see how fresh, as dew-besprent, he lies,
From blood-stains cleans’d, and clos’d his many wounds,
For many a lance was buried in his corpse.
So, e’en in death, the blessed Gods above,
Who lov’d him well, protect thy noble son.”

He said; th’ old man rejoicing heard his words,
And answer’d, “See, my son, how good it is
To give th’ immortal Gods their tribute due;
For never did my son, while yet he liv’d,
Neglect the Gods who on Olympus dwell;
And thence have they remember’d him in death.
Accept, I pray, this goblet rich-emboss’d;
Be thou my guard, and, under Heav’n, my guide,
Until I reach the tent of Peleus’ son.”

To whom in answer thus the Guardian-God:
“Old father, me thy younger wouldst thou tempt,
In vain; who bidd’st me at thy hands accept
Thy proffer’d presents, to Achilles’ wrong.
I dread his anger; and should hold it shame
To plunder him, through fear of future ill.
But, as thy guide, I could conduct thee safe,
As far as Argos, journeying by thy side,
On ship-board or on foot; nor by the fault
Of thy conductor shouldst thou meet with harm.”

Thus spoke the Guardian-God, and on the car
Mounting in haste, he took the whip and reins,
And with fresh vigour mules and horses fill’d.
When to the ship-tow’rs and the trench they came,
The guard had late been busied with their meal;
And with deep sleep the heav’nly Guide o’erspread
The eyes of all; then open’d wide the gates,
And push’d aside the bolts, and led within
Both Priam, and the treasure-laden wain.
But when they reach’d Achilles’ lofty tent,
(Which for their King the Myrmidons had built
Of fir-trees fell’d, and overlaid the roof
With rushes mown from off the neighb’ring mead;
And all around a spacious court enclos’d
With cross-set palisades; a single bar
Of fir the gateway guarded, which to shut
Three men, of all the others, scarce suffic’d,
And three to open; but Achilles’ hand
Unaided shut with ease the massive bar)
Then for the old man Hermes op’d the gate,
And brought within the court the gifts design’d
For Peleus’ godlike son; then from the car
Sprang to the ground, and thus to Priam spoke:
“Old man, a God hath hither been thy guide;
Hermes I am, and sent to thee from Jove,
Father of all, to bring thee safely here.
I now return, nor to Achilles’ eyes
Will I appear; beseems it not a God
To greet a mortal in the sight of all.
But go thou in, and clasp Achilles’ knees,
And supplicate him for his father’s sake,
His fair-hair’d mother’s, and his child’s, that so
Thy words may stir an answer in his heart.”

Thus saying, Hermes to Olympus’ heights
Return’d; and Priam from his chariot sprang,
And left Idaeus there, in charge to keep
The horses and the mules, while he himself
Enter’d the dwelling straight, where wont to sit
Achilles, lov’d of Heav’n. The chief he found
Within, his followers seated all apart;
Two only in his presence minister’d,
The brave Automedon, and Alcimus,
A warrior bold; scarce ended the repast
Of food and wine; the table still was set.
Great Priam enter’d, unperceiv’d of all;
And standing by Achilles, with his arms
Embrac’d his knees, and kiss’d those fearful hands,
Blood-stain’d, which many of his sons had slain.
As when a man, by cruel fate pursued,
In his own land hath shed another’s blood,
And flying, seeks beneath some wealthy house
A foreign refuge; wond’ring, all behold:
On godlike Priam so with wonder gaz’d
Achilles; wonder seiz’d th’ attendants all,
And one to other looked; then Priam thus
To Peleus’ son his suppliant speech address’d:
“Think, great Achilles, rival of the Gods,
Upon thy father, e’en as I myself
Upon the threshold of unjoyous age:
And haply he, from them that dwell around
May suffer wrong, with no protector near
To give him aid; yet he, rejoicing, knows
That thou still liv’st; and day by day may hope
To see his son returning safe from Troy;
While I, all hapless, that have many sons,
The best and bravest through the breadth of Troy,
Begotten, deem that none are left me now.
Fifty there were, when came the sons of Greece;
Nineteen the offspring of a single womb;
The rest, the women of my household bore.
Of these have many by relentless Mars
Been laid in dust; but he, my only one,
The city’s and his brethren’s sole defence,
He, bravely fighting in his country’s cause,
Hector, but lately by thy hand hath fall’n:
On his behalf I venture to approach
The Grecian ships; for his release to thee
To make my pray’r, and priceless ransom pay.
Then thou, Achilles, reverence the Gods;
And, for thy father’s sake, look pitying down
On me, more needing pity; since I bear
Such grief as never man on earth hath borne.
Who stoop to kiss the hand that slew my son.”

Thus as he spoke, within Achilles’ breast
Fond mem’ry of his father rose; he touch’d
The old man’s hand, and gently put him by;
Then wept they both, by various mem’ries stirr’d:
One, prostrate at Achilles’ feet, bewail’d
His warrior son; Achilles for his sire,
And for Patroclus wept, his comrade dear;
And through the house their weeping loud was heard.
But when Achilles had indulg’d his grief,
And eas’d the yearning of his heart and limbs,
Uprising, with his hand the aged sire,
Pitying his hoary head and hoary beard,
He rais’d, and thus with gentle words address’d:

“Alas, what sorrows, poor old man, are thine!
How couldst thou venture to the Grecian ships
Alone, and to the presence of the man
Whose hand hath slain so many of thy sons,
Many and brave? an iron heart is thine!
But sit thou on this seat; and in our hearts,
Though filled with grief, let us that grief suppress;
For woful lamentation nought avails.
Such, is the thread the Gods for mortals spin,
To live in woe, while they from cares are free.
Two coffers lie beside the door of Jove,
With gifts for man: one good, the other ill;
To whom from each the Lord of lightning gives,
Him sometimes evil, sometimes good befalls;
To whom the ill alone, him foul disgrace
And grinding mis’ry o’er the earth pursue:
By God and man alike despis’d he roams.
Thus from his birth the Gods to Peleus gave
Excellent gifts; with wealth and substance bless’d
Above his fellows; o’er the Myrmidons
He rul’d with sov’reign sway; and Heav’n bestow’d
On him, a mortal, an immortal bride.
Yet this of ill was mingled in his lot,
That in his house no rising race he saw
Of future Kings; one only son he had,
One doom’d to early death; nor is it mine
To tend my father’s age; but far from home
Thee and thy sons in Troy I vex with war.
Much have we heard too of thy former wealth;
Above what Lesbos northward, Macar’s seat,
Contains, and Upper Phrygia, and the shores
Of boundless Hellespont, ’tis said that thou
In wealth and number of thy sons wast bless’d.
But since on thee this curse the Gods have brought,
Still round thy city war and murder rage.
Bear up, nor thus with grief incessant mourn;
Vain is thy sorrow for thy gallant son;
Thou canst not raise him, and mayst suffer more.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire;
“Tell me not yet, illustrious chief, to sit,
While Hector lies, uncar’d for, in the tent;
But let me quickly go, that with mine eyes
I may behold my son; and thou accept
The ample treasures which we tender thee:
Mayst thou enjoy them, and in safety reach
Thy native land, since thou hast spar’d my life,
And bidd’st me still behold the light of Heav’n.”

To whom Achilles thus with stern regard:
“Old man, incense me not; I mean myself
To give thee back thy son; for here of late
Despatch’d by Jove, my Goddess-mother came,
The daughter of the aged Ocean-God:
And thee too, Priam, well I know, some God
(I cannot err) hath guided to our ships.
No mortal, though in vent’rous youth, would dare
Our camp to enter; nor could hope to pass
Unnotic’d by the watch, nor easily
Remove the pond’rous bar that guards our doors.
But stir not up my anger in my grief;
Lest, suppliant though thou be, within my tent
I brook thee not, and Jove’s command transgress.”

He said; the old man trembled, and obey’d;
Then to the door-way, with a lion’s spring,
Achilles rush’d; not unaccompanied;
With him Automedon and Alcimus,
His two attendants, of his followers all,
Next to the lost Patroclus, best-esteem’d;
They from the yoke the mules and horses loos’d;
Then led the herald of the old man in,
And bade him sit; and from the polish’d wain
The costly ransom took of Hector’s head.
Two robes they left, and one well-woven vest,
To clothe the corpse, and send with honour home.
Then to the female slaves he gave command
To wash the body, and anoint with oil,
Apart, that Priam might not see his son;
Lest his griev’d heart its passion unrestrain’d
Should utter, and Achilles, rous’d to wrath,
His suppliant slay, and Jove’s command transgress.
When they had wash’d the body, and with oil
Anointed, and around it wrapp’d the robe
And vest, Achilles lifted up the dead
With his own hands, and laid him on the couch;
Which to the polish’d wain his followers rais’d.
Then groaning, on his friend by name he call’d:
“Forgive, Patroclus! be not wroth with me,
If in the realm of darkness thou shouldst hear
That godlike Hector to his father’s arms,
For no mean ransom, I restore; whereof
A fitting share for thee I set aside.”

This said, Achilles to the tent return’d;
On the carv’d couch, from whence he rose, he sat
Beside the wall; and thus to Priam spoke:

“Old man, thy son, according to thy pray’r,
Is giv’n thee back; upon the couch he lies;
Thyself shalt see him at the dawn of day.
Meanwhile the ev’ning meal demands our care.
Not fair-hair’d Niobe abstain’d from food
When in the house her children lay in death,
Six beauteous daughters and six stalwart sons.
The youths, Apollo with his silver bow,
The maids, the Archer-Queen, Diana, slew,
With anger fill’d that Niobe presum’d
Herself with fair Latona to compare,
Her many children with her rival’s two;
So by the two were all the many slain.
Nine days in death they lay; and none was there
To pay their fun’ral rites; for Saturn’s son
Had given to all the people hearts of stone.
At length th’ immortal Gods entomb’d the dead.
Nor yet did Niobe, when now her grief
Had worn itself in tears, from food refrain.
And now in Sipylus, amid the rocks,
And lonely mountains, where the Goddess nymphs
That love to dance by Achelous’ stream,
’Tis said, were cradled, she, though turn’d to stone,
Broods o’er the wrongs inflicted by the Gods.
So we too, godlike sire, the meal may share;
And later, thou thy noble son mayst mourn,
To Troy restor’d—well worthy he thy tears.”

This said, he slaughter’d straight a white-fleec’d sheep;
His comrades then the carcase flay’d and dress’d:
The meat prepar’d, and fasten’d to the spits;
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew.
The bread Automedon from baskets fair
Apportion’d out; the meat Achilles shar’d.
They on the viands set before them fell.
The rage of thirst and hunger satisfied,
In wonder Priam on Achilles gaz’d,
His form and stature; as a God he seem’d;
And he too look’d on Priam, and admir’d
His venerable face, and gracious speech.
With mutual pleasure each on other gaz’d,
Till godlike Priam first address’d his host:

“Dismiss me now, illustrious chief, to rest;
And lie we down, in gentle slumbers wrapp’d;
For never have mine eyes been clos’d in sleep,
Since by thy hand my gallant son was slain:
But groaning still, I brood upon my woes,
And in my court with dust my head defile.
Now have I tasted bread, now ruddy wine
Hath o’er my palate pass’d; but not till now.”

Thus he; his comrades and th’ attendant maids
Achilles order’d in the corridor
Two mattresses to place, with blankets fair
Of purple wool o’erlaid; and on the top
Rugs and soft sheets for upper cov’ring spread.
They from the chamber, torch in hand, withdrew,
And with obedient haste two beds prepar’d.
Then thus Achilles spoke in jesting tone:
“Thou needs must sleep without, my good old friend;
Lest any leader of the Greeks should come,
As is their custom, to confer with me;
Of them whoe’er should find thee here by night
Forthwith to Agamemnon would report,
And Hector might not be so soon, restor’d.
But tell me truly this; how many days
For godlike Hector’s fun’ral rites ye need;
That for so long a time I may myself
Refrain from combat, and the people stay.”

To whom in answer Priam, godlike sire:
“If by thy leave we may indeed perform
His fun’ral rites, to thee, Achilles, great
Will be our gratitude, if this thou grant.
Thou know’st how close the town is hemm’d around;
And from the mountain, distant as it is,
The Trojans well may fear to draw the wood.
Nine days to public mourning would we give;
The tenth, to fun’ral rites and fun’ral feast;
Then on th’ eleventh would we raise his mound;
The twelfth, renew the war, if needs we must.”

To whom Achilles swift of foot replied:
“So shall it be, old Priam; I engage
To stay the battle for the time requir’d.”

Thus speaking, with his hand the old man’s wrist
He grasp’d, in token that he need not fear.
Then in the corridor lay down to rest
Old Priam and the herald, Elders sage;
While in his tent’s recess Achilles slept,
The fair Briseis resting by his side.

In night-long slumbers lay the other Gods,
And helmed chiefs, by gentle sleep subdued;
But on the eyes of Hermes, Guardian-God,
No slumber fell, deep pond’ring in his mind
How from the ships in safety to conduct
The royal Priam, and the guard elude.
Above the sleeper’s head he stood, and cried:
“Old man, small heed thou tak’st of coming ill,
Who, when Achilles gives thee leave to go,
Sleep’st undisturb’d, surrounded by thy foes.
Thy son hath been restor’d, and thou hast paid
A gen’rous price; but to redeem thy life,
If Agamemnon and the other Greeks
Should know that thou art here, full thrice so much
Thy sons, who yet are left, would have to pay.”

He said; the old man trembled, and arous’d
The herald; while the horses and the mules
Were yok’d by Hermes, who with silent speed
Drove through th’ encampment, unobserv’d of all.
But when they came to eddying Xanthus’ ford,
Fair-flowing stream, born of immortal Jove,
To high Olympus Hermes took his flight,
As morn, in saffron robe, o’er all the earth
Was light diffusing; they with fun’ral wail
Drove cityward the horses; following came
The mules that drew the litter of the dead.
The plain they travers’d o’er, observ’d of none,
Or man or woman, till Cassandra, fair
As golden Venus, from the topmost height
Of Pergamus, her father in his car
Upstanding saw, the herald at his side.
Him too she saw, who on the litter lay;
Then lifted up her voice, and cried aloud
To all the city, “Hither, Trojans, come,
Both men and women, Hector see restor’d;
If, while he liv’d, returning from the fight,
Ye met him e’er rejoicing, who indeed
Was all the city’s chiefest joy and pride.”

She said; nor man nor woman then was left
Within the city; o’er the minds of all
Grief pass’d, resistless; to the gates in throngs
They press’d, to crowd round him who brought the dead.
The first to clasp the body were his wife
And honour’d mother; eagerly they sprang
On the smooth-rolling wain, to touch the head
Of Hector; round them, weeping, stood the crowd
Weeping, till sunset, all the live-long day
Had they before the gates for Hector mourn’d;
Had not old Priam from the car address’d
The crowd: “Make way, that so the mules may pass;
When to my house I shall have brought my dead,
Ye there may vent your sorrow as ye will.”

Thus as he spoke, obedient to his word
They stood aside, and for the car made way:
But when to Priam’s lordly house they came,
They laid him on a rich-wrought couch, and call’d
The minstrels in, who by the hero’s bed
Should lead the melancholy chorus; they
Pour’d forth the music of the mournful dirge,
While women’s voices join’d in loud lament.
White-arm’d Andromache the wail began,
The head of Hector clasping in her hands:
“My husband, thou art gone in pride of youth,
And in thine house hast left me desolate;
Thy child an infant still, thy child and mine,
Unhappy parents both! nor dare I hope
That he may reach the ripeness of his youth;
For ere that day shall Troy in ruin fall,
Since thou art gone, her guardian! thou whose arm
Defended her, her wives, and helpless babes!
They now shall shortly o’er the sea be borne,
And with them I shall go; thou too, my child,
Must follow me, to servile labour doom’d,
The suff’ring victim of a tyrant Lord;
Unless perchance some angry Greek may seize
And dash thee from the tow’r—a woful death!
Whose brother, or whose father, or whose son
By Hector hath been slain; for many a Greek
By Hector’s hand hath bit the bloody dust;
Not light in battle was thy father’s hand!
Therefore for him the gen’ral city mourns;
Thou to thy parents bitter grief hast caus’d,
Hector! but bitt’rest grief of all hast left
To me! for not to me was giv’n to clasp
The hand extended from thy dying bed,
Nor words of wisdom catch, which night and day,
With tears, I might have treasur’d in my heart.”

Weeping she spoke—the women join’d the wail.
Then Hecuba took up the loud lament:
“Hector, of all my children dearest thou!
Dear to th’ Immortals too in life wast thou,
And they in death have borne thee still in mind;
For other of my sons, his captives made,
Across the wat’ry waste, to Samos’ isle
Or Imbros, or th’ inhospitable shore
Of Lemnos, hath Achilles, swift of foot,
To slav’ry sold; thee, when his sharp-edg’d spear
Had robb’d thee of thy life, he dragg’d indeed
Around Patroclus’ tomb, his comrade dear,
Whom thou hadst slain; yet so he rais’d not up
His dead to life again; now liest thou here,
All fresh and fair, as dew-besprent; like one
Whom bright Apollo, with his arrows keen,
God of the silver bow, hath newly slain.”

Weeping, she spoke; and rous’d the gen’ral grief.
Then Helen, third, the mournful strain renew’d:
“Hector, of all my brethren dearest thou!
True, godlike Paris claims me as his wife,
Who bore me hither—would I then had died!
But twenty years have pass’d since here I came,
And left my native land; yet ne’er from thee
I heard one scornful, one degrading word;
And when from others I have borne reproach,
Thy brothers, sisters, or thy brothers’ wives,
Or mother, (for thy sire was ever kind
E’en as a father) thou hast check’d them still
With tender feeling, and with gentle words.
For thee I weep, and for myself no less:
For, through the breadth of Troy, none love me now,
None kindly look on me, but all abhor.”

Weeping she spoke, and with her wept the crowd.
At length the aged Priam gave command:
“Haste now, ye Trojans, to the city bring
Good store of fuel; fear no treach’rous wile;
For when he sent me from the dark-ribb’d ships,
Achilles promis’d that from hostile arms
Till the twelfth morn we should no harm sustain.”

He said; and they the oxen and the mules
Yok’d to the wains, and from the city throng’d:
Nine days they labour’d, and brought back to Troy
Good store of wood; but when the tenth day’s light
Upon the earth appear’d, weeping, they bore
Brave Hector out; and on the fun’ral pile
Laying the glorious dead, applied the torch.

While yet the rosy-finger’d morn was young
Round noble Hector’s pyre the people press’d:
When all were gather’d round, and closely throng’d
First on the burning mass, as far as spread
The range of fire, they pour’d the ruddy wine,
And quench’d the flames: his brethren then and friends
Weeping, the hot tears flowing down their cheeks,
Collected from the pile the whiten’d bones;
These in a golden casket they enclos’d,
And o’er it spread soft shawls of purple dye;
Then in a grave they laid it, and in haste
With stone in pond’rous masses cover’d o’er;
And rais’d a mound, and watch’d on ev’ry side,
From sudden inroad of the Greeks to guard.
The mound erected, back they turn’d; and all
Assembled duly, shar’d the solemn feast
In Priam’s palace, Heav’n-descended King.

Such were the rites to glorious Hector paid.



FOOTNOTES

 [1] The text of the original leaves it somewhat in doubt whether the
 anger of the Greeks were directed against Thersites or Agamemnon. I
 believe the preponderance of authority, ancient and modern, is in
 favour of the former interpretation; but the latter is not without the
 support of some eminent scholars, and after much consideration I have
 been induced to adopt it. The original represents the Greeks as filled
 with anger and resentment against some one. Thersites was an object of
 general contempt, but he had done nothing to excite those feelings:
 indeed, apart from the offensiveness of his tone, the public sympathy
 was with him; for the army was deeply dissatisfied, and resented the
 conduct of Agamemnon against Achilles, mainly perhaps because they had
 ceased to be enriched with the plunder of his successful forays (see
 i. 202, and ix. 387). This dissatisfaction and resentment are referred
 to by Neptune (xiii. 126), and by Agamemnon himself (xiv. 55). They
 had lately manifested themselves in the alacrity with which the whole
 army had caught at the insidious suggestion of abandoning the war;
 and, just before the second assembly, Thersites avails himself of the
 general feeling, constituting himself the representative of a popular
 grievance, to vent his personal spite against Agamemnon. Ulysses saw
 how dangerous such a display might be at such a moment; and artfully
 assuming (line 281) that the feeling was confined to Thersites alone
 (though in his subsequent speech, line 335, he admits and excuses the
 general discontent), he proceeds to cut short its expression by
 summary chastisement. Thereupon the fickle multitude, “despite their
 anger” (against Agamemnon), cannot refrain from laughing at the signal
 discomfiture of their self-constituted champion.


This view is very fully set forth in a note on the passage appended to
a translation of the Iliad by Mr. Barter, published in 1859, but which
I have only seen since the publication of this work.


 [2] See also Book xxii. l. 252. Milton, in the corresponding passage
 at the close of the 4th Book of ‘Paradise Lost,’ reverses the sign,
 and represents the scale of the vanquished as “flying up” and “kicking
 the beam.” “The Fiend look’d up, and knew His mounted scale aloft; nor
 more, but fled Murm’ring, and with him fled the shades of night.”


 [3] This comparison does not afford a very accurate criterion of the
 “space interposed,” which cannot be estimated without knowing the
 total distance within which the faster was to outstrip the slower
 team.


 [4] This passage would seem to be the result of an oversight on the
 part of the Poet; who, apparently, had forgotten that Pylasmenes, “the
 Paphlagonian Chief,” had himself been killed by Menelaus, some time
 before the death of his son See Book V., l. 656.


 [5] Line 45 et seqq. I hope I may be pardoned for having somewhat
 curtailed the list of these ladies, which in the original extends over
 ten lines of names only. In doing so, I have followed the example of
 Virgil, who represents the same ladies [G. 4. 336] in attendance on
 Cyrene; and has not only reduced the list, but added some slight
 touches illustrating their occupations and private history: a liberty
 permissible to an imitator, but not to a translator.


 [6] L. 151. Chthizos, yesterday. But either the word must have a more
 extended signification than is usually given to it, or Homer must here
 have fallen into an error; for two complete nights and one day, that
 on which Patroclus met his death, had intervened since the visit of
 Ajax and Ulysses to the tent of Achilles. See also l. 215.


 [7] L. 547. The terms made use of in this line, and in 481, may appear
 somewhat coarse, as addressed by one Goddess to another: but I assure
 the English reader that in this passage especially I have greatly
 softened down the expression of the original; a literal translation of
 which, however forcible, would shock even the least fastidious critic.
 It must, indeed, be admitted that the mode in which “the white-armed
 Goddess” proceeds to execute her threat is hardly more dignified than
 the language, in which it is conveyed, is refined.


 [8] Line 737.—They being two, while I was only one. Such I believe to
 be the true interpretation of this passage, which, however, is one of
 admitted difficulty. According to our modern notions, it is not very
 evident what advantage two men in a car would have over one in
 another; nor what would be gained by the division of labour which
 assigned the reins to one and the whip to the other; but such, from
 line 740-741, appears to have been the view taken by Homer.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***

***** This file should be named 6150-0.txt or 6150-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/5/6150/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Odyssey, by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Odyssey

Author: Homer

Translator: Alexander Pope

Release Date: April, 2002 [eBook #3160]
[Most recently updated: July 18, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Jim Tinsley, Distributed Proofers and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***

cover




The Odyssey

by Homer

Translated by Alexander Pope


Contents

 INTRODUCTION.
 THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER
 BOOK I.
 BOOK II.
 BOOK III.
 BOOK IV.
 BOOK V.
 BOOK VI.
 BOOK VII.
 BOOK VIII.
 BOOK IX.
 BOOK X.
 BOOK XI.
 BOOK XII.
 BOOK XIII.
 BOOK XIV.
 BOOK XV.
 BOOK XVI.
 BOOK XVII.
 BOOK XVIII.
 BOOK XIX.
 BOOK XX.
 BOOK XXI.
 BOOK XXII.
 BOOK XXIII.
 BOOK XXIV.




INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the
most part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very
gradual character of our education, we must continually forget, and
emancipate ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set
aside old notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be
daily unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and
anxiety to acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu
of their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues
of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as
powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy
scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of
conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church.
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent
times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the
indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements are
jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an
ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records.
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this
troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is
sifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its
demands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere
facts. Human nature, viewed under an introduction of extended
experience, is the best help to the criticism of human history.
Historical characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form
correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a
great whole—we must measure them by their relation to the mass of
beings by whom they are surrounded; and, in contemplating the incidents
in their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, we
must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, than
the respective probability of its details.

It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere have, perhaps,
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all
three has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left
us little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in
which critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon
everything else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or
less of doubt and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the
contradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one
of the _dramatis personæ_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in
style. He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their
tone as those of the writers who have handed them down. When we have
read Plato _or_ Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when
we have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are
something worse than ignorant.

It has been an easy, and a popular expedient of late years, to deny the
personal or real existence of men and things whose life and condition
were too much for our belief. This system—which has often comforted the
religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of Strauss for
those of the New Testament—has been of incalculable value to the
historical theorists of the last and present centuries. To question the
existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than
to believe in that of Romulus. To deny a fact related in Herodotus,
because it is inconsistent with a theory developed from an Assyrian
inscription which no two scholars read in the same way, is more
pardonable, than to believe in the good-natured old king whom the
elegant pen of Florian has idealized—_Numa Pompilius_.

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer,
and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free
permission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all
written tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and
Odyssey. What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily
dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle. “This
cannot be true, because it is not true; and that is not true, because
it cannot be true.” Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon
testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and
oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of
the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken
of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to
Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of Cumae in AEolia was, at an
early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of
Greece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named
Critheis. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the
guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this
maiden that we “are indebted for so much happiness.” Homer was the
first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of
Melesigenes from having been born near the river Meles in Bœotia,
whither Critheis had been transported in order to save her reputation.

“At this time,” continues our narrative, “there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being
married, engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he
received as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was
her performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made
proposals of marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement,
willing to adopt her son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man,
if he were carefully brought up.”

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon
followed. Melesigenes carried on his adopted father’s school with great
success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna,
but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially
in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these
visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who
evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times,
persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his
travels. He promised not only to pay his expenses, but to furnish him
with a further stipend, urging, that, “While he was yet young, it was
fitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries and cities
which might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses.” Melesigenes
consented, and set out with his patron, “examining all the curiosities
of the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything by
interrogating those whom he met.” We may also suppose, that he wrote
memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of preservation. Having set sail
from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who
had already suffered in his eyes, became much worse; and Mentes, who
was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to the medical
superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of Alcinor.
Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly became
acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formed
the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that it
was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophonians make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.

But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of
one Tychias, an armourer. “And up to my time,” continues the author,
“the inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a
recitation of his verses; and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also
a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes
arrived.”

But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph
on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater
probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.

Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the _conversaziones_ of the old men,
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a
public maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously
renowned. They avowed their willingness to support him in the measure
he proposed, and procured him an audience in the council. Having made
the speech, with the purport of which our author has forgotten to
acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate respecting the answer
to be given to his proposal.

The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet’s
demand, but one man “observed that if they were to feed _Homers_, they
would be encumbered with a multitude of useless people.” “From this
circumstance,” says the writer, “Melesigenes acquired the name of
Homer, for the Cumans call blind men _Homers_.” With a love of economy,
which shows how similar the world has always been in its treatment of
literary men, the pension was denied, and the poet vented his
disappointment in a wish that Cumae might never produce a poet capable
of giving it renown and glory.

At Phocaea Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient
poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be literary
publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him.
At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: “O Thestorides, of
the many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more
unintelligible than the human heart.”

Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him
recite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a
profitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at
once determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be
setting sail thither, but he found one ready to start for Erythrae, a
town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the
seamen to allow him to accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a
favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the
imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn
down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocaea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty,
reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure,
which we will continue in the words of our author. “Having set out from
Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were
pasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus
(for that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up
quickly, called off his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For some
time he stood wondering how a blind man should have reached such a
place alone, and what could be his design in coming. He then went up to
him and inquired who he was, and how he had come to desolate places and
untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. Homer, by recounting to
him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with compassion;
and he took him and led him to his cot, and, having lit a fire, bade
him sup.

“The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according
to their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O
Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs
their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since,
whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

“Glaucus was pleased with the advice and marvelled at its author.
Having finished supper, they banqueted afresh on conversation, Homer
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.

“At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left
Homer at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus,
a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole
story respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to
what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and
feeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the
stranger to him.

“Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him,
assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon
showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general
knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the
charge of his children.”

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school, where he taught the precepts of poetry.
“To this day,” says Chandler, “the most curious remain is that which
has been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the
coast, at some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have
been an open temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape
is oval, and in the centre is the image of the goddess, the head and an
arm wanting. She is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair has a
lion carved on each side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a low
rim, or seat, and about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of the
mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remote
antiquity.”

So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable
fortune. He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single,
the other married a Chian.

The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the
personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already
been mentioned:—

“In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his
poem as the companion of Ulysses, in return for the care taken of him
when afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to
Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.”

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to
visit Greece whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is
said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity
of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention, he set
out for Samos. Here, being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him
in Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in
celebrating the Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave
great satisfaction, and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon
festivals, he earned a subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich,
with whose children he was very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios,
now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his
death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma
proposed by some fishermen’s children.

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we
possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical
worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in
detail. Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a
persevering, patient, and learned—but by no means consistent—series of
investigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring forward
statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.

“Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who
have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The
majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the
Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the
Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.”

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics
has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the
Homeric question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he
proceeds:—

“It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the
region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The
creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for
the most part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we were
in possession of all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly
explain the origin of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in
all essential points, must have remained the secret of the poet.”

From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of
human nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic
investigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer
an individual? or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious
arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?

Well has Landor remarked: “Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our
devotion to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know
what is good for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our
admiration of good. No man living venerates Homer more than I do.”

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and
fostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions
by minute analysis, our editorial office compels us to give some
attention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric
question is beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, to
prefer his judgment to his imagination, and to condescend to dry
details. Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the
question of this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I
must express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following
remarks:—

“We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame; and we would take the
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

“There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines
of Pope:—

“‘The critic eye—that microscope of wit—
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit;
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole.
The body’s harmony, the beaming soul,
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
When man’s whole frame is obvious to a flea.’”


Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning
the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and
cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo, the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longinus, in an oft-quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion
touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad; and,
among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names it would be tedious
to detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever
arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our
early ideas on the subject: let us now see what are the discoveries to
which more modern investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that “Homer wrote a sequel
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about
Peisistratus’ time, about five hundred years after.”

Two French writers—Hedelin and Perrault—avowed a similar scepticism on
the subject; but it is in the “Scienza Nuova” of Battista Vico, that we
first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf
with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian
theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold
hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote:—

“Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of
the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by
no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously
announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent
portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into
any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of
Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,
was thus one of the points in Wolf’s case against the primitive
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the
Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the
beginning.

“To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian aera. Few
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight,
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh
century before the Christian aera, are exceedingly trifling. We have no
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure
ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, Kallinus Tyrtaeus,
Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets, committed their
compositions to writing, or at what time the practice of doing so
became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes us to
presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous
ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenaea:
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are
unable to say.

“Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry—for they admit
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and
heard,—but upon the supposed necessity that there must have been
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poems—the unassisted
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory, is far
less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age essentially
non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable instruments and
materials for the process are not obvious. Moreover, there is a strong
positive reason for believing that the bard was under no necessity of
refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript; for if such had been
the fact, blindness would have been a disqualification for the
profession, which we know that it was not, as well from the example of
Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard of Chios, in
the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well as the general
tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer himself. The author of
that hymn, be he who he may, could never have described a blind man as
attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he had been conscious
that the memory of the bard was only maintained by constant reference
to the manuscript in his chest.”

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon
which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond
a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a
considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the
Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies
been preserved. If Chaucer’s poetry, for instance, had not been
written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more
like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble
original.

“At what period,” continues Grote, “these poems, or indeed any other
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture,
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of
Solon. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any
more determinate period, the question at once suggests itself, What
were the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its
first commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was a
written Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was
not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings,
and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of
voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for
emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never
reproduce. Not for the general public—they were accustomed to receive
it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn
and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad would
be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of
readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be
formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic
poems were first committed to writing. Now the period which may with
the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the
formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle
of the seventh century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C.
630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simenides of
Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated in
the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and music—the elegiac
and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the
primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred
from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life. Such a
change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of
publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the
nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking at
the old epical treasures of the people, as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric
rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and
eulogized the Thebais as the production of Homer. There seems,
therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this
newly-formed and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the
Homeric poems and other old epics,—the Thebais and the Cypria, as well
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,—began to be compiled towards the middle
of the seventh century B.C.; and the opening of Egypt to Grecian
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and
the number of manuscripts along with it: so that before the time of
Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though
still comparatively few, might have attained a certain recognized
authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the carelessness
of individual rhapsodies.”

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations:—

“There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
compilation, at least over the theory that the Iliad was cast into its
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the
fame, and the faint echo; if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonides were
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is
almost incredible that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
Homeric age; however the irregular use of the digamma may have
perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the
heroes of her age; however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing
characteristics:—still it is difficult to suppose that the language,
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts,
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.

“If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible,
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic
fact; that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the chieftain
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign: the
pre-eminent value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian
synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Odysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the
hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all its
direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the poetic
cycle, as to admit no rivalry,—it is still surprising, that throughout
the whole poem the _callida junctura_ should never betray the
workmanship of an Athenian hand; and that the national spirit of a
race, who have at a later period not inaptly been compared to our
self-admiring neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty
self-denial to the almost total exclusion of their own ancestors—or, at
least, to the questionable dignity of only having produced a leader
tolerably skilled in the military tactics of his age.”

To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that
Wolf’s objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is Lachmann’s
modification of his theory any better. He divides the first twenty-two
books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and treats as
ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one regular poem
belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus. This as Grote
observes, “ex-plains the gaps and contradictions in the narrative, but
it explains nothing else.” Moreover, we find no contradictions
warranting this belief, and the so-called sixteen poets concur in
getting rid of the following leading men in the first battle after the
secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the Euboeans; Tlepolemus, of
the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odins, of the Halizonians:
Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes again make
their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure, that “it
seems strange that any number of independent poets should have so
harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.” The
discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is represented as dead in the
fifth book, weeps at his son’s funeral in the thirteenth, can only be
regarded as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann’s modifications, with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success,
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems,
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In
short, “a man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the
period of its first compilation.” The friends or literary _employés_ of
Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the
silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic
“recension,” goes far to prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts
they examined, this was either wanting, or thought unworthy of
attention.

“Moreover,” he continues, “the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age
of Peisistratus—nothing which brings to our view the alterations
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c.,
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time,
undertaken the task of piecing together many self-existent epics into
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been
heard by Archilochus and Kallinus—in some cases even by Arktinus and
Hesiod—as genuine Homeric matter. As far as the evidences on the case,
as well internal as external, enable us to judge, we seem warranted in
believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited substantially as they
now stand (always allowing for partial divergences of text and
interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first trustworthy mark of Grecian
time; and this ancient date, let it be added, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most important attribute of
the Homeric poems, considered in reference to Grecian history; for they
thus afford us an insight into the anti-historical character of the
Greeks, enabling us to trace the subsequent forward march of the
nation, and to seize instructive contrasts between their former and
their later condition.”

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although I must
confess that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and
elegant, mind of that Athenian would lead him to preserve an ancient
and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and
reconstruct them according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeat
the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not,
or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed
author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we
are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version
of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical
probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the
Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories with an attempt,
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like
consistency. It is as follows:—

“No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to ‘discourse in excellent
music’ among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first,
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative,
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the
memory considerably.

“It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides, but most
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays connecting them
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the
‘Odyssea.’ The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem,
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging
arrangement of other people’s ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed,
arguing for the unity of authorship, ‘a great poet might have re-cast
pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no mere
arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.’

“While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a ballad,
recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seized
the hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleis grew under his
hand. Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem under
the same pseudonyme as his former work; and the disjointed lays of the
ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the Cid,
into a chronicle history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that the
poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but,
first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets,
assemblies, and agoras. However, Solon first, and then Peisistratus,
and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, and restored
the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their original integrity in a great
measure.”

Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which
have developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I
must still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of
the Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations
disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here
and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of
the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption; but it is to a
higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or
enjoy these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of
their one author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari
eum jus fasque sit_, I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of
historical evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these
great works to a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal
evidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most immediate
impulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an
attempt would be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its
importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on
its aesthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the
emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had
they been suggested to the author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he
would probably have adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact in
laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often
least competent to carry out their own precepts. Grammarians are not
poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_. I do not at this
moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially
improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from
Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute
points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale; and, inconsistent in everything but their
wish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book
after book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a
collection of fragments, or till those who fancied they possessed the
works of some great man, find that they have been put off with a vile
counterfeit got up at second hand. If we compare the theories of
Knight, Wolf, Lachmann; and others, we shall feel better satisfied of
the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of
Homer. One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his
theory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would
explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon
as a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill,
seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies
attributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors. Now, I will
venture to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only in
their borrowed phraseology—a phraseology with which writers like
Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselves—in their
freedom from real poetry, and last, but not least, in an ultra-refined
and consistent abandonment of good taste, that few writers of the
present day would question the capabilities of the same gentleman, be
he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many more
equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world
with the startling announcement that the AEneid of Virgil, and the
satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing to
say one word of disrespect against the industry and learning—nay, the
refined acuteness—which scholars like Wolf have bestowed upon this
subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric
theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather
than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking that the
literary history of more recent times will account for many points of
difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so
remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus
were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason
why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in
his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should
have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after
all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand
too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully
appeals, and which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has
sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much
violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with
love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author
of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human
invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most
ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the
contemplation of a polypus. There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the
very name of Homer. Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a
mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in
believing in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers
round the bed of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth
of imagination which a host of imitators could not exhaust,—still I am
far from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems found a
rich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse, from whence
he might derive both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to
_use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to
patch up the poem itself from such materials. What consistency of style
and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what
bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other
bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In
fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward
impressions—nay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents
which support and feed the impulses of imagination. But unless there be
some grand pervading principle—some invisible, yet most distinctly
stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never
come to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes the most
pathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods and
great men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in more
substantial forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power to
create a grand whole, to which these shall be but as details and
embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but a scrap-book, a
parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each other in their
wild redundancy; we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which will
require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware
as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief,
it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved
for a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature
intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which
the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were
faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our
ignorance on any matter. But we are too well taught the contrary
lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried,
touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon
the condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness attached
to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse
the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing
apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homaeopathic
dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply
wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots
which mere analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem, we must
transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination
must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the
same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but
attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely
suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of
Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer
that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems
their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who
is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely
observes:—

“It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No poet has
ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other
nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This is
a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the
period of their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared in
Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they
paid homage to his superior genius. He held up before his nation the
mirror in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes, no
less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity
and truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature;
on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forth
from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and
therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which
cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to his immortal spirit,
from another heaven than any of which he dreamed on earth, to look down
on his race, to see the nations from the fields of Asia, to the forests
of Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic
wand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vast
assemblage of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which had
been called into being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal
spirit may reside, this alone would suffice to complete his happiness.”

Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the “Apotheosis of
Homer” is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association,
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds,
is lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more
we read, and the more we think—think as becomes the readers of
Homer,—the more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry
gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the
means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury
of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it
a mere centre around which to drive a series of theories, whose
wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope’s translation, I will content myself with a brief
account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer
who has done it full justice:—

“This poem,” says Coleridge, “is a short mock-heroic of ancient date.
The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed and
corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenile
essay of Homer’s genius; others have attributed it to the same Pigrees
mentioned above, and whose reputation for humour seems to have invited
the appropriation of any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was
uncertain; so little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies,
know or care about that department of criticism employed in determining
the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being a
youthful prolusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that from the
beginning to the end, it is a plain and palpable parody, not only of
the general spirit, but of numerous passages of the Iliad itself; and,
even if no such intention to parody were discernible in it, the
objection would still remain, that to suppose a work of mere burlesque
to be the primary effort of poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse
that order in the development of national taste, which the history of
every other people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost
ascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society
much more refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that
any popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see, with as
much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe that none of
them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the usage of the word
δὲλτος, ‘writing tablet,’ instead of διφθέρα, ‘skin,’ which, according
to Herod 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic Greeks for
that purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic ingenuity;
and generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a
strong argument against so ancient a date for its composition.”

Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope’s
design, I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation,
and on my own purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his
whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes,
which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical
attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it
is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the
contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a
perfect transcript of the original. And in those days, what is called
literal translation was less cultivated than at present. If something
like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of
a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing
fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the
poet’s meaning, his words were less jealously sought for, and those who
could read so good a poem as Pope’s Iliad had fair reason to be
satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope’s translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at
it as a most delightful work in itself,—a work which is as much a part
of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn
from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
ἀμφικύπελλον being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from
us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman’s
fine, bold, rough old English;—far be it from us to hold up his
translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still
dismiss Pope’s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the
consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books
before they have read its fellow.

THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.


_Christ Church._




THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER.


BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.
MINERVA’S DESCENT TO ITHACA.


The poem opens within forty eight days of the arrival of Ulysses in his
dominions. He had now remained seven years in the Island of Calypso,
when the gods assembled in council, proposed the method of his
departure from thence and his return to his native country. For this
purpose it is concluded to send Mercury to Calypso, and Pallas
immediately descends to Ithaca. She holds a conference with Telemachus,
in the shape of Mantes, king of Taphians; in which she advises him to
take a journey in quest of his father Ulysses, to Pylos and Sparta,
where Nestor and Menelaus yet reigned; then, after having visibly
displayed her divinity, disappears. The suitors of Penelope make great
entertainments, and riot in her palace till night. Phemius sings to
them the return of the Grecians, till Penelope puts a stop to the song.
Some words arise between the suitors and Telemachus, who summons the
council to meet the day following.


The man for wisdom’s various arts renown’d,
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound;
Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall,
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray’d,
Their manners noted, and their states survey’d,
On stormy seas unnumber’d toils he bore,
Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore:
Vain toils! their impious folly dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindictive doom’d them never more
(Ah, men unbless’d!) to touch that natal shore.
Oh, snatch some portion of these acts from fate,
Celestial Muse! and to our world relate.

Now at their native realms the Greeks arrived;
All who the wars of ten long years survived;
And ’scaped the perils of the gulfy main.
Ulysses, sole of all the victor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coast,
Deplored his absent queen and empire lost.
Calypso in her caves constrain’d his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
In vain-for now the circling years disclose
The day predestined to reward his woes.
At length his Ithaca is given by fate,
Where yet new labours his arrival wait;
At length their rage the hostile powers restrain,
All but the ruthless monarch of the main.
But now the god, remote, a heavenly guest,
In Æthiopia graced the genial feast
(A race divided, whom with sloping rays
The rising and descending sun surveys);
There on the world’s extremest verge revered
With hecatombs and prayer in pomp preferr’d,
Distant he lay: while in the bright abodes
Of high Olympus, Jove convened the gods:
The assembly thus the sire supreme address’d,
AEgysthus’ fate revolving in his breast,
Whom young Orestes to the dreary coast
Of Pluto sent, a blood-polluted ghost.

“Perverse mankind! whose wills, created free,
Charge all their woes on absolute degree;
All to the dooming gods their guilt translate,
And follies are miscall’d the crimes of fate.
When to his lust AEgysthus gave the rein,
Did fate, or we, the adulterous act constrain?
Did fate, or we, when great Atrides died,
Urge the bold traitor to the regicide?
Hermes I sent, while yet his soul remain’d
Sincere from royal blood, and faith profaned;
To warn the wretch, that young Orestes, grown
To manly years, should re-assert the throne.
Yet, impotent of mind, and uncontroll’d,
He plunged into the gulf which Heaven foretold.”

Here paused the god; and pensive thus replies
Minerva, graceful with her azure eyes:

“O thou! from whom the whole creation springs,
The source of power on earth derived to kings!
His death was equal to the direful deed;
So may the man of blood be doomed to bleed!
But grief and rage alternate wound my breast
For brave Ulysses, still by fate oppress’d.
Amidst an isle, around whose rocky shore
The forests murmur, and the surges roar,
The blameless hero from his wish’d-for home
A goddess guards in her enchanted dome;
(Atlas her sire, to whose far-piercing eye
The wonders of the deep expanded lie;
The eternal columns which on earth he rears
End in the starry vault, and prop the spheres).
By his fair daughter is the chief confined,
Who soothes to dear delight his anxious mind;
Successless all her soft caresses prove,
To banish from his breast his country’s love;
To see the smoke from his loved palace rise,
While the dear isle in distant prospect lies,
With what contentment could he close his eyes!
And will Omnipotence neglect to save
The suffering virtue of the wise and brave?
Must he, whose altars on the Phrygian shore
With frequent rites, and pure, avow’d thy power,
Be doom’d the worst of human ills to prove,
Unbless’d, abandon’d to the wrath of Jove?”

“Daughter! what words have pass’d thy lips unweigh’d!
(Replied the Thunderer to the martial maid;)
Deem not unjustly by my doom oppress’d,
Of human race the wisest and the best.
Neptune, by prayer repentant rarely won,
Afflicts the chief, to avenge his giant son,
Whose visual orb Ulysses robb’d of light;
Great Polypheme, of more than mortal might?
Him young Thousa bore (the bright increase
Of Phorcys, dreaded in the sounds and seas);
Whom Neptune eyed with bloom of beauty bless’d,
And in his cave the yielding nymph compress’d
For this the god constrains the Greek to roam,
A hopeless exile from his native home,
From death alone exempt—but cease to mourn;
Let all combine to achieve his wish’d return;
Neptune atoned, his wrath shall now refrain,
Or thwart the synod of the gods in vain.”

“Father and king adored!” Minerva cried,
“Since all who in the Olympian bower reside
Now make the wandering Greek their public care,
Let Hermes to the Atlantic isle repair;
Bid him, arrived in bright Calypso’s court,
The sanction of the assembled powers report:
That wise Ulysses to his native land
Must speed, obedient to their high command.
Meantime Telemachus, the blooming heir
Of sea-girt Ithaca, demands my care;
’Tis mine to form his green, unpractised years
In sage debates; surrounded with his peers,
To save the state, and timely to restrain
The bold intrusion of the suitor-train;
Who crowd his palace, and with lawless power
His herds and flocks in feastful rites devour.
To distant Sparta, and the spacious waste
Of Sandy Pyle, the royal youth shall haste.
There, warm with filial love, the cause inquire
That from his realm retards his god-like sire;
Delivering early to the voice of fame
The promise of a green immortal name.”

She said: the sandals of celestial mould,
Fledged with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet: with these sublime she sails
The aërial space, and mounts the winged gales;
O’er earth and ocean wide prepared to soar,
Her dreaded arm a beamy javelin bore,
Ponderous and vast: which, when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o’erturns.
From high Olympus prone her flight she bends,
And in the realms of Ithaca descends,
Her lineaments divine, the grave disguise
Of Mentes’ form conceal’d from human eyes
(Mentes, the monarch of the Taphian land);
A glittering spear waved awful in her hand.
There in the portal placed, the heaven-born maid
Enormous riot and misrule survey’d.
On hides of beeves, before the palace gate
(Sad spoils of luxury), the suitors sate.
With rival art, and ardour in their mien,
At chess they vie, to captivate the queen;
Divining of their loves. Attending nigh,
A menial train the flowing bowl supply.
Others, apart, the spacious hall prepare,
And form the costly feast with busy care.
There young Telemachus, his bloomy face
Glowing celestial sweet, with godlike grace
Amid the circle shines: but hope and fear
(Painful vicissitude!) his bosom tear.
Now, imaged in his mind, he sees restored
In peace and joy the people’s rightful lord;
The proud oppressors fly the vengeful sword.
While his fond soul these fancied triumphs swell’d,
The stranger guest the royal youth beheld;
Grieved that a visitant so long should wait
Unmark’d, unhonour’d, at a monarch’s gate;
Instant he flew with hospitable haste,
And the new friend with courteous air embraced.
“Stranger, whoe’er thou art, securely rest,
Affianced in my faith, a ready guest;
Approach the dome, the social banquet share,
And then the purpose of thy soul declare.”

Thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
And to the dome the unknown celestial leads.
The spear receiving from the hand, he placed
Against a column, fair with sculpture graced;
Where seemly ranged in peaceful order stood
Ulysses’ arms now long disused to blood.
He led the goddess to the sovereign seat,
Her feet supported with a stool of state
(A purple carpet spread the pavement wide);
Then drew his seat, familiar, to her side;
Far from the suitor-train, a brutal crowd,
With insolence, and wine, elate and loud:
Where the free guest, unnoted, might relate,
If haply conscious, of his father’s fate.
The golden ewer a maid obsequious brings,
Replenish’d from the cool, translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size;
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Delicious wines the attending herald brought;
The gold gave lustre to the purple draught.
Lured with the vapour of the fragrant feast,
In rush’d the suitors with voracious haste;
Marshall’d in order due, to each a sewer
Presents, to bathe his hands, a radiant ewer.
Luxurious then they feast. Observant round
Gay stripling youths the brimming goblets crown’d.
The rage of hunger quell’d, they all advance
And form to measured airs the mazy dance;
To Phemius was consign’d the chorded lyre,
Whose hand reluctant touch’d the warbling wire;
Phemius, whose voice divine could sweetest sing
High strains responsive to the vocal string.

Meanwhile, in whispers to his heavenly guest
His indignation thus the prince express’d:

“Indulge my rising grief, whilst these (my friend)
With song and dance the pompous revel end.
Light is the dance, and doubly sweet the lays,
When for the dear delight another pays.
His treasured stores those cormarants consume,
Whose bones, defrauded of a regal tomb
And common turf, lie naked on the plain,
Or doom’d to welter in the whelming main.
Should he return, that troop so blithe and bold,
With purple robes inwrought, and stiff with gold,
Precipitant in fear would wing their flight,
And curse their cumbrous pride’s unwieldy weight.
But ah, I dream!-the appointed hour is fled.
And hope, too long with vain delusion fed,
Deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame,
Gives to the roll of death his glorious name!
With venial freedom let me now demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land;
Sincere from whence began thy course, recite,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?
Now first to me this visit dost thou deign,
Or number’d in my father’s social train?
All who deserved his choice he made his own,
And, curious much to know, he far was known.”

“My birth I boast (the blue-eyed virgin cries)
From great Anchialus, renown’d and wise;
Mentes my name; I rule the Taphian race,
Whose bounds the deep circumfluent waves embrace;
A duteous people, and industrious isle,
To naval arts inured, and stormy toil.
Freighted with iron from my native land,
I steer my voyage to the Brutian strand
To gain by commerce, for the labour’d mass,
A just proportion of refulgent brass.
Far from your capital my ship resides
At Reitorus, and secure at anchor rides;
Where waving groves on airy Neign grow,
Supremely tall and shade the deeps below.
Thence to revisit your imperial dome,
An old hereditary guest I come;
Your father’s friend. Laertes can relate
Our faith unspotted, and its early date;
Who, press’d with heart-corroding grief and years,
To the gay court a rural shed prefers,
Where, sole of all his train, a matron sage
Supports with homely fond his drooping age,
With feeble steps from marshalling his vines
Returning sad, when toilsome day declines.

“With friendly speed, induced by erring fame,
To hail Ulysses’ safe return I came;
But still the frown of some celestial power
With envious joy retards the blissful hour.
Let not your soul be sunk in sad despair;
He lives, he breathes this heavenly vital air,
Among a savage race, whose shelfy bounds
With ceaseless roar the foaming deep surrounds.
The thoughts which roll within my ravish’d breast,
To me, no seer, the inspiring gods suggest;
Nor skill’d nor studious, with prophetic eye
To judge the winged omens of the sky.
Yet hear this certain speech, nor deem it vain;
Though adamantine bonds the chief restrain,
The dire restraint his wisdom will defeat,
And soon restore him to his regal seat.
But generous youth! sincere and free declare,
Are you, of manly growth, his royal heir?
For sure Ulysses in your look appears,
The same his features, if the same his years.
Such was that face, on which I dwelt with joy
Ere Greece assembled stemm’d the tides to Troy;
But, parting then for that detested shore,
Our eyes, unhappy never greeted more.”

“To prove a genuine birth (the prince replies)
On female truth assenting faith relies.
Thus manifest of right, I build my claim
Sure-founded on a fair maternal fame,
Ulysses’ son: but happier he, whom fate
Hath placed beneath the storms which toss the great!
Happier the son, whose hoary sire is bless’d
With humble affluence, and domestic rest!
Happier than I, to future empire born,
But doom’d a father’s wretch’d fate to mourn!”

To whom, with aspect mild, the guest divine:
“Oh true descendant of a sceptred line!
The gods a glorious fate from anguish free
To chaste Penelope’s increase decree.
But say, yon jovial troops so gaily dress’d,
Is this a bridal or a friendly feast?
Or from their deed I rightlier may divine,
Unseemly flown with insolence and wine?
Unwelcome revellers, whose lawless joy
Pains the sage ear, and hurts the sober eye.”

“Magnificence of old (the prince replied)
Beneath our roof with virtue could reside;
Unblamed abundance crowned the royal board,
What time this dome revered her prudent lord;
Who now (so Heaven decrees) is doom’d to mourn,
Bitter constraint, erroneous and forlorn.
Better the chief, on Ilion’s hostile plain,
Had fall’n surrounded with his warlike train;
Or safe return’d, the race of glory pass’d,
New to his friends’ embrace, and breathed his last!
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes would raise,
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honour graced his son.
Now snatch’d by harpies to the dreary coast.
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost;
Vanish’d at once! unheard of, and unknown!
And I his heir in misery alone.
Nor for a dear lost father only flow
The filial tears, but woe succeeds to woe
To tempt the spouseless queen with amorous wiles
Resort the nobles from the neighbouring isles;
From Samos, circled with the Ionian main,
Dulichium, and Zacynthas’ sylvan reign;
Ev’n with presumptuous hope her bed to ascend,
The lords of Ithaca their right pretend.
She seems attentive to their pleaded vows,
Her heart detesting what her ear allows.
They, vain expectants of the bridal hour,
My stores in riotous expense devour.
In feast and dance the mirthful months employ,
And meditate my doom to crown their joy.”

With tender pity touch’d, the goddess cried:
“Soon may kind Heaven a sure relief provide,
Soon may your sire discharge the vengeance due,
And all your wrongs the proud oppressors rue!
Oh! in that portal should the chief appear,
Each hand tremendous with a brazen spear,
In radiant panoply his limbs incased
(For so of old my father’s court he graced,
When social mirth unbent his serious soul,
O’er the full banquet, and the sprightly bowl);
He then from Ephyre, the fair domain
Of Ilus, sprung from Jason’s royal strain,
Measured a length of seas, a toilsome length, in vain.
For, voyaging to learn the direful art
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Observant of the gods, and sternly just,
Ilus refused to impart the baneful trust;
With friendlier zeal my father’s soul was fired,
The drugs he knew, and gave the boon desired.
Appear’d he now with such heroic port,
As then conspicuous at the Taphian court;
Soon should yon boasters cease their haughty strife,
Or each atone his guilty love with life.
But of his wish’d return the care resign,
Be future vengeance to the powers divine.
My sentence hear: with stern distaste avow’d,
To their own districts drive the suitor-crowd;
When next the morning warms the purple east,
Convoke the peerage, and the gods attest;
The sorrows of your inmost soul relate;
And form sure plans to save the sinking state.
Should second love a pleasing flame inspire,
And the chaste queen connubial rights require;
Dismiss’d with honour, let her hence repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Then let this dictate of my love prevail:
Instant, to foreign realms prepare to sail,
To learn your father’s fortunes; Fame may prove,
Or omen’d voice (the messenger of Jove),
Propitious to the search. Direct your toil
Through the wide ocean first to sandy Pyle;
Of Nestor, hoary sage, his doom demand:
Thence speed your voyage to the Spartan strand;
For young Atrides to the Achaian coast
Arrived the last of all the victor host.
If yet Ulysses views the light, forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year.
But if his soul hath wing’d the destined flight,
Inhabitant of deep disastrous night;
Homeward with pious speed repass the main,
To the pale shade funereal rites ordain,
Plant the fair column o’er the vacant grave,
A hero’s honours let the hero have.
With decent grief the royal dead deplored,
For the chaste queen select an equal lord.
Then let revenge your daring mind employ,
By fraud or force the suitor train destroy,
And starting into manhood, scorn the boy.
Hast thou not heard how young Orestes, fired
With great revenge, immortal praise acquired?
His virgin-sword AEgysthus’ veins imbrued;
The murderer fell, and blood atoned for blood.
O greatly bless’d with every blooming grace!
With equal steps the paths of glory trace;
Join to that royal youth’s your rival name,
And shine eternal in the sphere of fame.
But my associates now my stay deplore,
Impatient on the hoarse-resounding shore.
Thou, heedful of advice, secure proceed;
My praise the precept is, be thine the deed.

“The counsel of my friend (the youth rejoin’d)
Imprints conviction on my grateful mind.
So fathers speak (persuasive speech and mild)
Their sage experience to the favourite child.
But, since to part, for sweet refection due,
The genial viands let my train renew;
And the rich pledge of plighted faith receive,
Worthy the heir of Ithaca to give.”

“Defer the promised boon (the goddess cries,
Celestial azure brightening in her eyes),
And let me now regain the Reithrian port;
From Temese return’d, your royal court
I shall revisit, and that pledge receive;
And gifts, memorial of our friendship, leave.”

Abrupt, with eagle-speed she cut the sky;
Instant invisible to mortal eye.
Then first he recognized the ethereal guest;
Wonder and joy alternate fire his breast;
Heroic thoughts, infused, his heart dilate;
Revolving much his father’s doubtful fate.
At length, composed, he join’d the suitor-throng;
Hush’d in attention to the warbled song.
His tender theme the charming lyrist chose.
Minerva’s anger, and the dreadful woes
Which voyaging from Troy the victors bore,
While storms vindictive intercept the store.
The shrilling airs the vaulted roof rebounds,
Reflecting to the queen the silver sounds.
With grief renew’d the weeping fair descends;
Their sovereign’s step a virgin train attends:
A veil, of richest texture wrought, she wears,
And silent to the joyous hall repairs.
There from the portal, with her mild command,
Thus gently checks the minstrel’s tuneful hand:

“Phemius! let acts of gods, and heroes old,
What ancient bards in hall and bower have told,
Attemper’d to the lyre, your voice employ;
Such the pleased ear will drink with silent joy.
But, oh! forbear that dear disastrous name,
To sorrow sacred, and secure of fame;
My bleeding bosom sickens at the sound,
And every piercing note inflicts a wound.”

“Why, dearest object of my duteous love,
(Replied the prince,) will you the bard reprove?
Oft, Jove’s ethereal rays (resistless fire)
The chanter’s soul and raptured song inspire
Instinct divine? nor blame severe his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes with heart and voice;
For novel lays attract our ravish’d ears;
But old, the mind with inattention hears:
Patient permit the sadly pleasing strain;
Familiar now with grief, your tears refrain,
And in the public woe forget your own;
You weep not for a perish’d lord alone.
What Greeks new wandering in the Stygian gloom,
Wish your Ulysses shared an equal doom!
Your widow’d hours, apart, with female toil
And various labours of the loom beguile;
There rule, from palace-cares remote and free;
That care to man belongs, and most to me.”

Mature beyond his years, the queen admires
His sage reply, and with her train retires.
Then swelling sorrows burst their former bounds,
With echoing grief afresh the dome resounds;
Till Pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Meantime, rekindled at the royal charms,
Tumultuous love each beating bosom warms;
Intemperate rage a wordy war began;
But bold Telemachus assumed the man.
“Instant (he cried) your female discord end,
Ye deedless boasters! and the song attend;
Obey that sweet compulsion, nor profane
With dissonance the smooth melodious strain.
Pacific now prolong the jovial feast;
But when the dawn reveals the rosy east,
I, to the peers assembled, shall propose
The firm resolve, I here in few disclose;
No longer live the cankers of my court;
All to your several states with speed resort;
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if, to honour lost, ’tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flock shall bleed;
Judge and revenge my right, impartial Jove!
By him and all the immortal thrones above
(A sacred oath), each proud oppressor slain,
Shall with inglorious gore this marble stain.”

Awed by the prince, thus haughty, bold, and young,
Rage gnaw’d the lip, and wonder chain’d the tongue.
Silence at length the gay Antinous broke,
Constrain’d a smile, and thus ambiguous spoke:
“What god to your untutor’d youth affords
This headlong torrent of amazing words?
May Jove delay thy reign, and cumber late
So bright a genius with the toils of state!”

“Those toils (Telemachus serene replies)
Have charms, with all their weight, t’allure the wise.
Fast by the throne obsequious fame resides,
And wealth incessant rolls her golden tides.
Nor let Antinous rage, if strong desire
Of wealth and fame a youthful bosom fire:
Elect by Jove, his delegate of sway,
With joyous pride the summons I’d obey.
Whene’er Ulysses roams the realm of night,
Should factious power dispute my lineal right,
Some other Greeks a fairer claim may plead;
To your pretence their title would precede.
At least, the sceptre lost, I still should reign
Sole o’er my vassals, and domestic train.”

To this Eurymachus: “To Heaven alone
Refer the choice to fill the vacant throne.
Your patrimonial stores in peace possess;
Undoubted, all your filial claim confess:
Your private right should impious power invade,
The peers of Ithaca would arm in aid.
But say, that stranger guest who late withdrew,
What and from whence? his name and lineage shew.
His grave demeanour and majestic grace
Speak him descended of no vulgar race:
Did he some loan of ancient right require,
Or came forerunner of your sceptr’d sire?”

“Oh son of Polybus!” the prince replies,
“No more my sire will glad these longing eyes;
The queen’s fond hope inventive rumour cheers,
Or vain diviners’ dreams divert her fears.
That stranger-guest the Taphian realm obeys,
A realm defended with encircling seas.
Mentes, an ever-honour’d name, of old
High in Ulysses’ social list enroll’d.”

Thus he, though conscious of the ethereal guest,
Answer’d evasive of the sly request.
Meantime the lyre rejoins the sprightly lay;
Love-dittied airs, and dance, conclude the day
But when the star of eve with golden light
Adorn’d the matron brow of sable night,
The mirthful train dispersing quit the court,
And to their several domes to rest resort.
A towering structure to the palace join’d;
To this his steps the thoughtful prince inclined:
In his pavilion there, to sleep repairs;
The lighted torch, the sage Euryclea bears
(Daughter of Ops, the just Pisenor’s son,
For twenty beeves by great Laertes won;
In rosy prime with charms attractive graced,
Honour’d by him, a gentle lord and chaste,
With dear esteem: too wise, with jealous strife
To taint the joys of sweet connubial life.
Sole with Telemachus her service ends,
A child she nursed him, and a man attends).
Whilst to his couch himself the prince address’d,
The duteous dame received the purple vest;
The purple vest with decent care disposed,
The silver ring she pull’d, the door reclosed,
The bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
To the strong staple’s inmost depth restored,
Secured the valves. There, wrapped in silent shade,
Pensive, the rules the goddess gave he weigh’d;
Stretch’d on the downy fleece, no rest he knows,
And in his raptured soul the vision glows.




BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.
THE COUNCIL OF ITHACA.


Telemachus in the assembly of the lords of Ithaca complains of the
injustice done him by the suitors, and insists upon their departure
from his palace; appealing to the princes, and exciting the people to
declare against them. The suitors endeavour to justify their stay, at
least till he shall send the queen to the court of Icarius her father;
which he refuses. There appears a prodigy of two eagles in the sky,
which an augur expounds to the ruin of the suitors. Telemachus then
demands a vessel to carry him to Pylos and Sparta, there to inquire of
his father’s fortunes. Pallas, in the shape of Mentor (an ancient
friend of Ulysses), helps him to a ship, assists him in preparing
necessaries for the voyage, and embarks with him that night; which
concludes the second day from the opening of the poem. The scene
continues in the palace of Ulysses, in Ithaca.


Now reddening from the dawn, the morning ray
Glow’d in the front of heaven, and gave the day
The youthful hero, with returning light,
Rose anxious from the inquietudes of night.
A royal robe he wore with graceful pride,
A two-edged falchion threaten’d by his side,
Embroider’d sandals glitter’d as he trod,
And forth he moved, majestic as a god.
Then by his heralds, restless of delay,
To council calls the peers: the peers obey.
Soon as in solemn form the assembly sate,
From his high dome himself descends in state.
Bright in his hand a ponderous javelin shined;
Two dogs, a faithful guard, attend behind;
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
And gazing crowds admire him as he moves,

His father’s throne he fill’d; while distant stood
The hoary peers, and aged wisdom bow’d.

’Twas silence all. At last AEgyptius spoke;
AEgyptius, by his age and sorrow broke;
A length of days his soul with prudence crown’d,
A length of days had bent him to the ground.
His eldest hope in arms to Ilion came,
By great Ulysses taught the path to fame;
But (hapless youth) the hideous Cyclops tore
His quivering limbs, and quaff’d his spouting gore.
Three sons remain’d; to climb with haughty fires
The royal bed, Eurynomus aspires;
The rest with duteous love his griefs assuage,
And ease the sire of half the cares of age.
Yet still his Antiphus he loves, he mourns,
And, as he stood, he spoke and wept by turns,

“Since great Ulysses sought the Phrygian plains,
Within these walls inglorious silence reigns.
Say then, ye peers! by whose commands we meet?
Why here once more in solemn council sit?
Ye young, ye old, the weighty cause disclose:
Arrives some message of invading foes?
Or say, does high necessity of state
Inspire some patriot, and demand debate?
The present synod speaks its author wise;
Assist him, Jove, thou regent of the skies!”

He spoke. Telemachus with transport glows,
Embraced the omen, and majestic rose
(His royal hand the imperial sceptre sway’d);
Then thus, addressing to AEgyptius, said:

“Reverend old man! lo here confess’d he stands
By whom ye meet; my grief your care demands.
No story I unfold of public woes,
Nor bear advices of impending foes:
Peace the blest land, and joys incessant crown:
Of all this happy realm, I grieve alone.
For my lost sire continual sorrows spring,
The great, the good; your father and your king.
Yet more; our house from its foundation bows,
Our foes are powerful, and your sons the foes;
Hither, unwelcome to the queen, they come;
Why seek they not the rich Icarian dome?
If she must wed, from other hands require
The dowry: is Telemachus her sire?
Yet through my court the noise of revel rings,
And waste the wise frugality of kings.
Scarce all my herds their luxury suffice;
Scarce all my wine their midnight hours supplies.
Safe in my youth, in riot still they grow,
Nor in the helpless orphan dread a foe.
But come it will, the time when manhood grants
More powerful advocates than vain complaints.
Approach that hour! insufferable wrong
Cries to the gods, and vengeance sleeps too long.
Rise then, ye peers! with virtuous anger rise;
Your fame revere, but most the avenging skies.
By all the deathless powers that reign above,
By righteous Themis and by thundering Jove
(Themis, who gives to councils, or denies
Success; and humbles, or confirms the wise),
Rise in my aid! suffice the tears that flow
For my lost sire, nor add new woe to woe.
If e’er he bore the sword to strengthen ill,
Or, having power to wrong, betray’d the will,
On me, on me your kindled wrath assuage,
And bid the voice of lawless riot rage.
If ruin to your royal race ye doom,
Be you the spoilers, and our wealth consume.
Then might we hope redress from juster laws,
And raise all Ithaca to aid our cause:
But while your sons commit the unpunish’d wrong,
You make the arm of violence too strong.”

While thus he spoke, with rage and grief he frown’d,
And dash’d the imperial sceptre to the ground.
The big round tear hung trembling in his eye:
The synod grieved, and gave a pitying sigh,
Then silent sate—at length Antinous burns
With haughty rage, and sternly thus returns:

“O insolence of youth! whose tongue affords
Such railing eloquence, and war of words.
Studious thy country’s worthies to defame,
Thy erring voice displays thy mother’s shame.
Elusive of the bridal day, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.
Did not the sun, through heaven’s wide azure roll’d,
For three long years the royal fraud behold?
While she, laborious in delusion, spread
The spacious loom, and mix’d the various thread:
Where as to life the wondrous figures rise,
Thus spoke the inventive queen, with artful sighs:

“Though cold in death Ulysses breathes no more,
Cease yet awhile to urge the bridal hour:
Cease, till to great Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death.
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
When he, whom living mighty realms obey’d,
Shall want in death a shroud to grace his shade.’

“Thus she: at once the generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue’s fair disguise.
The work she plied; but, studious of delay,
By night reversed the labours of the day.
While thrice the sun his annual journey made,
The conscious lamp the midnight fraud survey’d;
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth her maid unfolds the amazing tale.
We saw, as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Then urged, she perfects her illustrious toils;
A wondrous monument of female wiles!

“But you, O peers! and thou, O prince! give ear
(I speak aloud, that every Greek may hear):
Dismiss the queen; and if her sire approves
Let him espouse her to the peer she loves:
Bid instant to prepare the bridal train,
Nor let a race of princes wait in vain.
Though with a grace divine her soul is blest,
And all Minerva breathes within her breast,
In wondrous arts than woman more renown’d,
And more than woman with deep wisdom crown’d;
Though Tyro nor Mycene match her name,
Not great Alcmena (the proud boasts of fame);
Yet thus by heaven adorn’d, by heaven’s decree
She shines with fatal excellence, to thee:
With thee, the bowl we drain, indulge the feast,
Till righteous heaven reclaim her stubborn breast.
What though from pole to pole resounds her name!
The son’s destruction waits the mother’s fame:
For, till she leaves thy court, it is decreed,
Thy bowl to empty and thy flock to bleed.”

While yet he speaks, Telemachus replies:
“Ev’n nature starts, and what ye ask denies.
Thus, shall I thus repay a mother’s cares,
Who gave me life, and nursed my infant years!
While sad on foreign shores Ulysses treads.
Or glides a ghost with unapparent shades;
How to Icarius in the bridal hour
Shall I, by waste undone, refund the dower?
How from my father should I vengeance dread!
How would my mother curse my hated head!
And while in wrath to vengeful fiends she cries,
How from their hell would vengeful fiends arise!
Abhorr’d by all, accursed my name would grow,
The earth’s disgrace, and human-kind my foe.
If this displease, why urge ye here your stay?
Haste from the court, ye spoilers, haste away:
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if to honour lost, ’tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed;
Judge, and assert my right, impartial Jove!
By him, and all the immortal host above
(A sacred oath), if heaven the power supply,
Vengeance I vow, and for your wrongs ye die.”

With that, two eagles from a mountain’s height
By Jove’s command direct their rapid flight;
Swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin’d,
Stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind.
Above the assembled peers they wheel on high,
And clang their wings, and hovering beat the sky;
With ardent eyes the rival train they threat,
And shrieking loud denounce approaching fate.
They cuff, they tear; their cheeks and neck they rend,
And from their plumes huge drops of blood descend;
Then sailing o’er the domes and towers, they fly,
Full toward the east, and mount into the sky.

The wondering rivals gaze, with cares oppress’d,
And chilling horrors freeze in every breast,
Till big with knowledge of approaching woes,
The prince of augurs, Halitherses, rose:
Prescient he view’d the aërial tracks, and drew
A sure presage from every wing that flew.

“Ye sons (he cried) of Ithaca, give ear;
Hear all! but chiefly you, O rivals! hear.
Destruction sure o’er all your heads impends
Ulysses comes, and death his steps attends.
Nor to the great alone is death decreed;
We and our guilty Ithaca must bleed.
Why cease we then the wrath of heaven to stay?
Be humbled all, and lead, ye great! the way.
For lo my words no fancied woes relate;
I speak from science and the voice of fate.

“When great Ulysses sought the Phrygian shores
To shake with war proud Ilion’s lofty towers,
Deeds then undone my faithful tongue foretold:
Heaven seal’d my words, and you those deeds behold.
I see (I cried) his woes, a countless train;
I see his friends o’erwhelm’d beneath the main;
How twice ten years from shore to shore he roams:
Now twice ten years are past, and now he comes!”

To whom Eurymachus—“Fly, dotard fly,
With thy wise dreams, and fables of the sky.
Go prophesy at home, thy sons advise:
Here thou art sage in vain—I better read the skies
Unnumber’d birds glide through the aërial way;
Vagrants of air, and unforeboding stray.
Cold in the tomb, or in the deeps below,
Ulysses lies; oh wert thou laid as low!
Then would that busy head no broils suggest,
For fire to rage Telemachus’ breast,
From him some bribe thy venal tongue requires,
And interest, not the god, thy voice inspires.
His guideless youth, if thy experienced age
Mislead fallacious into idle rage,
Vengeance deserved thy malice shall repress.
And but augment the wrongs thou would’st redress,
Telemachus may bid the queen repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Till she retires, determined we remain,
And both the prince and augur threat in vain:
His pride of words, and thy wild dream of fate,
Move not the brave, or only move their hate,
Threat on, O prince! elude the bridal day.
Threat on, till all thy stores in waste decay.
True, Greece affords a train of lovely dames,
In wealth and beauty worthy of our flames:
But never from this nobler suit we cease;
For wealth and beauty less than virtue please.”

To whom the youth: “Since then in vain I tell
My numerous woes, in silence let them dwell.
But Heaven, and all the Greeks, have heard my wrongs;
To Heaven, and all the Greeks, redress belongs;
Yet this I ask (nor be it ask’d in vain),
A bark to waft me o’er the rolling main,
The realms of Pyle and Sparta to explore,
And seek my royal sire from shore to shore;
If, or to fame his doubtful fate be known,
Or to be learn’d from oracles alone,
If yet he lives, with patience I forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year;
But if already wandering in the train
Of empty shades, I measure back the main,
Plant the fair column o’er the mighty dead,
And yield his consort to the nuptial bed.”

He ceased; and while abash’d the peers attend,
Mentor arose, Ulysses’ faithful friend:
(When fierce in arms he sought the scenes of war,
“My friend (he cried), my palace be thy care;
Years roll’d on years my godlike sire decay,
Guard thou his age, and his behests obey.”)
Stern as he rose, he cast his eyes around,
That flash’d with rage; and as spoke, he frown’d,

“O never, never more let king be just,
Be mild in power, or faithful to his trust!
Let tyrants govern with an iron rod,
Oppress, destroy, and be the scourge of God;
Since he who like a father held his reign,
So soon forgot, was just and mild in vain!
True, while my friend is grieved, his griefs I share;
Yet now the rivals are my smallest care:
They for the mighty mischiefs they devise,
Ere long shall pay—their forfeit lives the price.
But against you, ye Greeks! ye coward train!
Gods! how my soul is moved with just disdain!
Dumb ye all stand, and not one tongue affords
His injured prince the little aid of words.”

While yet he spoke, Leocritus rejoined:
“O pride of words, and arrogance of mind!
Would’st thou to rise in arms the Greeks advise?
Join all your powers? in arms, ye Greeks, arise!
Yet would your powers in vain our strength oppose.
The valiant few o’ermatch a host of foes.
Should great Ulysses stern appear in arms,
While the bowl circles and the banquet warms;
Though to his breast his spouse with transport flies,
Torn from her breast, that hour, Ulysses dies.
But hence retreating to your domes repair.
To arm the vessel, Mentor! be thy care,
And Halitherses! thine: be each his friend;
Ye loved the father: go, the son attend.
But yet, I trust, the boaster means to stay
Safe in the court, nor tempt the watery way.”

Then, with a rushing sound the assembly bend
Diverse their steps: the rival rout ascend
The royal dome; while sad the prince explores
The neighbouring main, and sorrowing treads the shores.
There, as the waters o’er his hands he shed,
The royal suppliant to Minerva pray’d:

“O goddess! who descending from the skies
Vouchsafed thy presence to my wondering eyes,
By whose commands the raging deeps I trace,
And seek my sire through storms and rolling seas!
Hear from thy heavens above, O warrior maid!
Descend once more, propitious to my aid.
Without thy presence, vain is thy command:
Greece, and the rival train, thy voice withstand.”

Indulgent to his prayer, the goddess took
Sage Mentor’s form, and thus like Mentor spoke:

“O prince, in early youth divinely wise,
Born, the Ulysses of thy age to rise
If to the son the father’s worth descends,
O’er the wide wave success thy ways attends
To tread the walks of death he stood prepared;
And what he greatly thought, he nobly dared.
Were not wise sons descendant of the wise,
And did not heroes from brave heroes rise,
Vain were my hopes: few sons attain the praise
Of their great sires, and most their sires disgrace.
But since thy veins paternal virtue fires,
And all Penelope thy soul inspires,
Go, and succeed: the rivals’ aims despise;
For never, never wicked man was wise.
Blind they rejoice, though now, ev’n now they fall;
Death hastes amain: one hour o’erwhelms them all!
And lo, with speed we plough the watery way;
My power shall guard thee, and my hand convey:
The winged vessel studious I prepare,
Through seas and realms companion of thy care.
Thou to the court ascend: and to the shores
(When night advances) bear the naval stores;
Bread, that decaying man with strength supplies,
And generous wine, which thoughtful sorrow flies.
Meanwhile the mariners, by my command,
Shall speed aboard, a valiant chosen band.
Wide o’er the bay, by vessel vessel rides;
The best I choose to waft then o’er the tides.”

She spoke: to his high dome the prince returns,
And, as he moves, with royal anguish mourns.
’Twas riot all, among the lawless train;
Boar bled by boar, and goat by goat lay slain.
Arrived, his hand the gay Antinous press’d,
And thus deriding, with a smile address’d:

“Grieve not, O daring prince! that noble heart;
Ill suits gay youth the stern heroic part.
Indulge the genial hour, unbend thy soul,
Leave thought to age, and drain the flowing bowl.
Studious to ease thy grief, our care provides
The bark, to waft thee o’er the swelling tides.”

“Is this (returns the prince) for mirth a time?
When lawless gluttons riot, mirth’s a crime;
The luscious wines, dishonour’d, lose their taste;
The song is noise, and impious is the feast.
Suffice it to have spent with swift decay
The wealth of kings, and made my youth a prey.
But now the wise instructions of the sage,
And manly thoughts inspired by manly age,
Teach me to seek redress for all my woe,
Here, or in Pyle—in Pyle, or here, your foe.
Deny your vessels, ye deny in vain:
A private voyager I pass the main.
Free breathe the winds, and free the billows flow;
And where on earth I live, I live your foe.”

He spoke and frown’d, nor longer deign’d to stay,
Sternly his hand withdrew, and strode away.

Meantime, o’er all the dome, they quaff, they feast,
Derisive taunts were spread from guest to guest,
And each in jovial mood his mate address’d:

“Tremble ye not, O friends, and coward fly,
Doom’d by the stern Telemachus to die?
To Pyle or Sparta to demand supplies,
Big with revenge, the mighty warrior flies;
Or comes from Ephyre with poisons fraught,
And kills us all in one tremendous draught!”

“Or who can say (his gamesome mate replies)
But, while the danger of the deeps he tries
He, like his sire, may sink deprived of breath,
And punish us unkindly by his death?
What mighty labours would he then create,
To seize his treasures, and divide his state,
The royal palace to the queen convey,
Or him she blesses in the bridal day!”

Meantime the lofty rooms the prince surveys,
Where lay the treasures of the Ithacian race:
Here ruddy brass and gold refulgent blazed;
There polished chests embroider’d vestures graced;
Here jars of oil breathed forth a rich perfume;
There casks of wine in rows adorn’d the dome
(Pure flavorous wine, by gods in bounty given
And worthy to exalt the feasts of heaven).
Untouch’d they stood, till, his long labours o’er,
The great Ulysses reach’d his native shore.
A double strength of bars secured the gates;
Fast by the door the wise Euryclea waits;
Euryclea, who great Ops! thy lineage shared,
And watch’d all night, all day, a faithful guard.

To whom the prince: “O thou whose guardian care
Nursed the most wretched king that breathes the air;
Untouch’d and sacred may these vessels stand,
Till great Ulysses views his native land.
But by thy care twelve urns of wine be fill’d;
Next these in worth, and firm these urns be seal’d;
And twice ten measures of the choicest flour
Prepared, ere yet descends the evening hour.
For when the favouring shades of night arise,
And peaceful slumbers close my mother’s eyes,
Me from our coast shall spreading sails convey,
To seek Ulysses through the watery way.”

While yet he spoke, she fill’d the walls with cries,
And tears ran trickling from her aged eyes.
“O whither, whither flies my son (she cried)
To realms; that rocks and roaring seas divide?
In foreign lands thy father’s days decay’d.
And foreign lands contain the mighty dead.
The watery way ill-fated if thou try,
All, all must perish, and by fraud you die!
Then stay, my, child! storms beat, and rolls the main,
Oh, beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain!”

“Far hence (replied the prince) thy fears be driven:
Heaven calls me forth; these counsels are of Heaven.
But, by the powers that hate the perjured, swear,
To keep my voyage from the royal ear,
Nor uncompell’d the dangerous truth betray,
Till twice six times descends the lamp of day,
Lest the sad tale a mother’s life impair,
And grief destroy what time awhile would spare.”

Thus he. The matron with uplifted eyes
Attests the all-seeing sovereign of the skies.
Then studious she prepares the choicest flour,
The strength of wheat and wines an ample store.
While to the rival train the prince returns,
The martial goddess with impatience burns;
Like thee, Telemachus, in voice and size,
With speed divine from street to street she flies,
She bids the mariners prepared to stand,
When night descends, embodied on the strand.
Then to Noëmon swift she runs, she flies,
And asks a bark: the chief a bark supplies.

And now, declining with his sloping wheels,
Down sunk the sun behind the western hills
The goddess shoved the vessel from the shores,
And stow’d within its womb the naval stores,
Full in the openings of the spacious main
It rides; and now descends the sailor-train,

Next, to the court, impatient of delay.
With rapid step the goddess urged her way;
There every eye with slumberous chains she bound,
And dash’d the flowing goblet to the ground.
Drowsy they rose, with heavy fumes oppress’d,
Reel’d from the palace, and retired to rest.
Then thus, in Mentor’s reverend form array’d,
Spoke to Telemachus the martial maid.
“Lo! on the seas, prepared the vessel stands,
The impatient mariner thy speed demands.”
Swift as she spoke, with rapid pace she leads;
The footsteps of the deity he treads.
Swift to the shore they move along the strand;
The ready vessel rides, the sailors ready stand.

He bids them bring their stores; the attending train
Load the tall bark, and launch into the main,
The prince and goddess to the stern ascend;
To the strong stroke at once the rowers bend.
Full from the west she bids fresh breezes blow;
The sable billows foam and roar below.
The chief his orders gives; the obedient band
With due observance wait the chief’s command;
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
High o’er the roaring waves the spreading sails
Bow the tall mast, and swell before the gales;
The crooked keel the parting surge divides,
And to the stern retreating roll the tides.
And now they ship their oars, and crown with wine
The holy goblet to the powers divine:
Imploring all the gods that reign above,
But chief the blue-eyed progeny of Jove.

Thus all the night they stem the liquid way,
And end their voyage with the morning ray.




BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.
THE INTERVIEW OF TELEMACHUS AND NESTOR.


Telemachus, guided by Pallas in the shape of Mentor, arrives in the
morning at Pylos, where Nestor and his sons are sacrificing on the sea-
shore to Neptune. Telemachus declares the occasion of his coming: and
Nestor relates what passed in their return from Troy, how their fleets
were separated, and he never since heard of Ulysses. They discourse
concerning the death of Agamemnon, the revenge of Orestes, and the
injuries of the suitors. Nestor advises him to go to Sparta, and
inquire further of Menelaus. The sacrifice ending with the night,
Minerva vanishes from them in the form of an eagle: Telemachus is
lodged in the palace. The next morning they sacrifice a bullock to
Minerva; and Telemachus proceeds on his journey to Sparta, attended by
Pisistratus.
    The scene lies on the sea-shore of Pylos.


The sacred sun, above the waters raised,
Through heaven’s eternal brazen portals blazed;
And wide o’er earth diffused his cheering ray,
To gods and men to give the golden day.
Now on the coast of Pyle the vessel falls,
Before old Neleus’ venerable walls.
There suppliant to the monarch of the flood,
At nine green theatres the Pylians stood,
Each held five hundred (a deputed train),
At each, nine oxen on the sand lay slain.
They taste the entrails, and the altars load
With smoking thighs, an offering to the god.
Full for the port the Ithacensians stand,
And furl their sails, and issue on the land.
Telemachus already press’d the shore;
Not first, the power of wisdom march’d before,
And ere the sacrificing throng he join’d,
Admonish’d thus his well-attending mind:

“Proceed, my son! this youthful shame expel;
An honest business never blush to tell.
To learn what fates thy wretched sire detain,
We pass’d the wide immeasurable main.
Meet then the senior far renown’d for sense
With reverend awe, but decent confidence:
Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies;
And sure he will; for wisdom never lies.”

“Oh tell me, Mentor! tell me, faithful guide
(The youth with prudent modesty replied),
How shall I meet, or how accost the sage,
Unskill’d in speech, nor yet mature of age?
Awful th’approach, and hard the task appears,
To question wisely men of riper years.”

To whom the martial goddess thus rejoin’d:
“Search, for some thoughts, thy own suggesting mind;
And others, dictated by heavenly power,
Shall rise spontaneous in the needful hour.
For nought unprosperous shall thy ways attend,
Born with good omens, and with heaven thy friend.”

She spoke, and led the way with swiftest speed;
As swift, the youth pursued the way she led;
and join’d the band before the sacred fire,
Where sate, encompass’d with his sons, the sire.
The youth of Pylos, some on pointed wood
Transfix’d the fragments, some prepared the food:
In friendly throngs they gather to embrace
Their unknown guests, and at the banquet place,
Pisistratus was first to grasp their hands,
And spread soft hides upon the yellow sands;
Along the shore the illustrious pair he led,
Where Nestor sate with youthful Thrasymed,
To each a portion of the feast he bore,
And held the golden goblet foaming o’er;
Then first approaching to the elder guest,
The latent goddess in these words address’d:
“Whoe’er thou art, whom fortune brings to keep
These rites of Neptune, monarch of the deep,
Thee first it fits, O stranger! to prepare
The due libation and the solemn prayer;
Then give thy friend to shed the sacred wine;
Though much thy younger, and his years like mine,
He too, I deem, implores the power divine;
For all mankind alike require their grace,
All born to want; a miserable race!”
He spake, and to her hand preferr’d the bowl;
A secret pleasure touch’d Athena’s soul,
To see the preference due to sacred age
Regarded ever by the just and sage.
Of Ocean’s king she then implores the grace.
“O thou! whose arms this ample globe embrace,
Fulfil our wish, and let thy glory shine
On Nestor first, and Nestor’s royal line;
Next grant the Pylian states their just desires,
Pleased with their hecatomb’s ascending fires;
Last, deign Telemachus and me to bless,
And crown our voyage with desired success.”

Thus she: and having paid the rite divine,
Gave to Ulysses’ son the rosy wine.
Suppliant he pray’d. And now the victims dress’d
They draw, divide, and celebrate the feast.
The banquet done, the narrative old man,
Thus mild, the pleasing conference began:

“Now gentle guests! the genial banquet o’er,
It fits to ask ye, what your native shore,
And whence your race? on what adventure say,
Thus far you wander through the watery way?
Relate if business, or the thirst of gain,
Engage your journey o’er the pathless main
Where savage pirates seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, venturous of their own.”

Urged by the precepts by the goddess given,
And fill’d with confidence infused from Heaven,
The youth, whom Pallas destined to be wise
And famed among the sons of men, replies:
“Inquir’st thou, father! from what coast we came?
(Oh grace and glory of the Grecian name!)
From where high Ithaca o’erlooks the floods,
Brown with o’er-arching shades and pendent woods
Us to these shores our filial duty draws,
A private sorrow, not a public cause.
My sire I seek, where’er the voice of fame
Has told the glories of his noble name,
The great Ulysses; famed from shore to shore
For valour much, for hardy suffering more.
Long time with thee before proud Ilion’s wall
In arms he fought; with thee beheld her fall.
Of all the chiefs, this hero’s fate alone
Has Jove reserved, unheard of, and unknown;
Whether in fields by hostile fury slain,
Or sunk by tempests in the gulfy main?
Of this to learn, oppress’d with tender fears,
Lo, at thy knee his suppliant son appears.
If or thy certain eye, or curious ear,
Have learnt his fate, the whole dark story clear
And, oh! whate’er Heaven destined to betide,
Let neither flattery soothe, nor pity hide.
Prepared I stand: he was but born to try
The lot of man; to suffer, and to die.
Oh then, if ever through the ten years’ war
The wise, the good Ulysses claim’d thy care;
If e’er he join’d thy council, or thy sword,
True in his deed, and constant to his word;
Far as thy mind through backward time can see
Search all thy stores of faithful memory:
’Tis sacred truth I ask, and ask of thee.”

To him experienced Nestor thus rejoin’d:
“O friend! what sorrows dost thou bring to mind!
Shall I the long, laborious scene review,
And open all the wounds of Greece anew?
What toils by sea! where dark in quest of prey
Dauntless we roved; Achilles led the way;
What toils by land! where mix’d in fatal fight
Such numbers fell, such heroes sunk to night;
There Ajax great, Achilles there the brave,
There wise Patroclus, fill an early grave:
There, too, my son—ah, once my best delight
Once swift of foot, and terrible in fight;
In whom stern courage with soft virtue join’d
A faultless body and a blameless mind;
Antilochus—What more can I relate?
How trace the tedious series of our fate?
Not added years on years my task could close,
The long historian of my country’s woes;
Back to thy native islands might’st thou sail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale.
Nine painful years on that detested shore;
What stratagems we form’d, what toils we bore!
Still labouring on, till scarce at last we found
Great Jove propitious, and our conquest crown’d.
Far o’er the rest thy mighty father shined,
In wit, in prudence, and in force of mind.
Art thou the son of that illustrious sire?
With joy I grasp thee, and with love admire.
So like your voices, and your words so wise,
Who finds thee younger must consult his eyes.
Thy sire and I were one; nor varied aught
In public sentence, or in private thought;
Alike to council or the assembly came,
With equal souls, and sentiments the same.
But when (by wisdom won) proud Ilion burn’d,
And in their ships the conquering Greeks return’d,
’Twas God’s high will the victors to divide,
And turn the event, confounding human pride;
Some he destroy’d, some scatter’d as the dust
(Not all were prudent, and not all were just).
Then Discord, sent by Pallas from above,
Stern daughter of the great avenger Jove,
The brother-kings inspired with fell debate;
Who call’d to council all the Achaian state,
But call’d untimely (not the sacred rite
Observed, nor heedful of the setting light,
Nor herald sword the session to proclaim),
Sour with debauch, a reeling tribe they came.
To these the cause of meeting they explain,
And Menelaus moves to cross the main;
Not so the king of men: he will’d to stay,
The sacred rites and hecatombs to pay,
And calm Minerva’s wrath. Oh blind to fate!
The gods not lightly change their love, or hate.
With ireful taunts each other they oppose,
Till in loud tumult all the Greeks arose.
Now different counsels every breast divide,
Each burns with rancour to the adverse side;
The unquiet night strange projects entertain’d
(So Jove, that urged us to our fate, ordain’d).
We with the rising morn our ships unmoor’d,
And brought our captives and our stores aboard;
But half the people with respect obey’d
The king of men, and at his bidding stay’d.
Now on the wings of winds our course we keep
(For God had smooth’d the waters of the deep);
For Tenedos we spread our eager oars,
There land, and pay due victims to the powers;
To bless our safe return, we join in prayer;
But angry Jove dispersed our vows in air,
And raised new discord. Then (so Heaven decreed)
Ulysses first and Nestor disagreed!
Wise as he was, by various counsels sway’d,
He there, though late, to please the monarch, stay’d.
But I, determined, stem the foamy floods,
Warn’d of the coming fury of the gods.
With us, Tydides fear’d, and urged his haste:
And Menelaus came, but came the last,
He join’d our vessels in the Lesbian bay,
While yet we doubted of our watery way;
If to the right to urge the pilot’s toil
(The safer road), beside the Psyrian isle;
Or the straight course to rocky Chios plough,
And anchor under Mimas’ shaggy brow?
We sought direction of the power divine:
The god propitious gave the guiding sign;
Through the mid seas he bid our navy steer,
And in Euboea shun the woes we fear.
The whistling winds already waked the sky;
Before the whistling winds the vessels fly,
With rapid swiftness cut the liquid way,
And reach Gerestus at the point of day.
There hecatombs of bulls, to Neptune slain,
High-flaming please the monarch of the main.
The fourth day shone, when all their labours o’er,
Tydides’ vessels touched the wish’d-for shore.
But I to Pylos scud before the gales,
The god still breathing on my swelling sails;
Separate from all, I safely landed here;
Their fates or fortunes never reach’d my ear.
Yet what I learn’d, attend; as here I sat,
And ask’d each voyager each hero’s fate;
Curious to know, and willing to relate.

“Safe reach’d the Myrmidons their native land,
Beneath Achilles’ warlike son’s command.
Those, whom the heir of great Apollo’s art,
Brave Philoctetes, taught to wing the dart;
And those whom Idomen from Ilion’s plain
Had led, securely cross’d the dreadful main
How Agamemnon touch’d his Argive coast,
And how his life by fraud and force he lost,
And how the murderer, paid his forfeit breath;
What lands so distant from that scene of death
But trembling heard the fame? and heard, admire.
How well the son appeased his slaughter’d sire!
Ev’n to the unhappy, that unjustly bleed,
Heaven gives posterity, to avenge the deed.
So fell Ægysthus; and mayest thou, my friend,
(On whom the virtues of thy sire descend,)
Make future times thy equal act adore,
And be what brave Orestes was before!”

The prudent youth replied: “O thou the grace
And lasting glory of the Grecian race!
Just was the vengeance, and to latest days
Shall long posterity resound the praise.
Some god this arm with equal prowess bless!
And the proud suitors shall its force confess;
Injurious men! who while my soul is sore
Of fresh affronts, are meditating more.
But Heaven denies this honour to my hand,
Nor shall my father repossess the land;
The father’s fortune never to return,
And the sad son’s to softer and to mourn!”
Thus he; and Nestor took the word: “My son,
Is it then true, as distant rumours run,
That crowds of rivals for thy mother’s charms
Thy palace fill with insults and alarms?
Say, is the fault, through tame submission, thine?
Or leagued against thee, do thy people join,
Moved by some oracle, or voice divine?
And yet who knows, but ripening lies in fate
An hour of vengeance for the afflicted state;
When great Ulysses shall suppress these harms,
Ulysses singly, or all Greece in arms.
But if Athena, war’s triumphant maid,
The happy son will as the father aid,
(Whose fame and safety was her constant care
In every danger and in every war:
Never on man did heavenly favour shine
With rays so strong, distinguish’d and divine,
As those with which Minerva mark’d thy sire)
So might she love thee, so thy soul inspire!
Soon should their hopes in humble dust be laid,
And long oblivion of the bridal bed.”

“Ah! no such hope (the prince with sighs replies)
Can touch my breast; that blessing Heaven denies.
Ev’n by celestial favour were it given,
Fortune or fate would cross the will of Heaven.”

“What words are these, and what imprudence thine?
(Thus interposed the martial maid divine)
Forgetful youth! but know, the Power above
With ease can save each object of his love;
Wide as his will, extends his boundless grace;
Nor lost in time nor circumscribed by place.
Happier his lot, who, many sorrows pass’d,
Long labouring gains his natal shore at last;
Than who, too speedy, hastes to end his life
By some stern ruffian, or adulterous wife.
Death only is the lot which none can miss,
And all is possible to Heaven but this.
The best, the dearest favourite of the sky,
Must taste that cup, for man is born to die.”

Thus check’d, replied Ulysses’ prudent heir:
“Mentor, no more—the mournful thought forbear;
For he no more must draw his country’s breath,
Already snatch’d by fate, and the black doom of death!
Pass we to other subjects; and engage
On themes remote the venerable sage
(Who thrice has seen the perishable kind
Of men decay, and through three ages shined
Like gods majestic, and like gods in mind);
For much he knows, and just conclusions draws,
From various precedents, and various laws.
O son of Neleus! awful Nestor, tell
How he, the mighty Agamemnon, fell;
By what strange fraud Ægysthus wrought, relate
(By force he could not) such a hero’s fate?
Live Menelaus not in Greece? or where
Was then the martial brother’s pious care?
Condemn’d perhaps some foreign shore to tread;
Or sure Ægysthus had not dared the deed.”

To whom the full of days: Illustrious youth,
Attend (though partly thou hast guess’d) the truth.
For had the martial Menelaus found
The ruffian breathing yet on Argive ground;
Nor earth had bid his carcase from the skies,
Nor Grecian virgins shriek’d his obsequies,
But fowls obscene dismember’d his remains,
And dogs had torn him on the naked plains.
While us the works of bloody Mars employ’d,
The wanton youth inglorious peace enjoy’d:
He stretch’d at ease in Argos’ calm recess
(Whose stately steeds luxuriant pastures bless),
With flattery’s insinuating art
Soothed the frail queen, and poison’d all her heart.
At first, with worthy shame and decent pride,
The royal dame his lawless suit denied.
For virtue’s image yet possess’d her mind.
Taught by a master of the tuneful kind;
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Consign’d the youthful consort to his care.
True to his charge, the bard preserved her long
In honour’s limits; such the power of song.
But when the gods these objects of their hate
Dragg’d to destruction by the links of fate;
The bard they banish’d from his native soil,
And left all helpless in a desert isle;
There he, the sweetest of the sacred train,
Sung dying to the rocks, but sung in vain.
Then virtue was no more; her guard away,
She fell, to lust a voluntary prey.
Even to the temple stalk’d the adulterous spouse,
With impious thanks, and mockery of the vows,
With images, with garments, and with gold;
And odorous fumes from loaded altars roll’d.

“Meantime from flaming Troy we cut the way
With Menelaus, through the curling sea.
But when to Sunium’s sacred point we came,
Crown’d with the temple of the Athenian dame;
Atride’s pilot, Phrontes, there expired
(Phrontes, of all the songs of men admired
To steer the bounding bark with steady toil,
When the storm thickens, and the billows boil);
While yet he exercised the steerman’s art,
Apollo touch’d him with his gentle dart;
Even with the rudder in his hand, he fell.
To pay whole honours to the shades of hell,
We check’d our haste, by pious office bound,
And laid our old companion in the ground.
And now the rites discharged, our course we keep
Far on the gloomy bosom of the deep:
Soon as Malae’s misty tops arise,
Sudden the Thunderer blackens all the skies,
And the winds whistle, and the surges roll
Mountains on mountains, and obscure the pole.
The tempest scatters, and divides our fleet;
Part, the storm urges on the coast of Crete,
Where winding round the rich Cydonian plain,
The streams of Jardan issue to the main.
There stands a rock, high, eminent and steep,
Whose shaggy brow o’erhangs the shady deep,
And views Gortyna on the western side;
On this rough Auster drove the impetuous tide:
With broken force the billows roll’d away,
And heaved the fleet into the neighb’ring bay.
Thus saved from death, they gain’d the Phæstan shores,
With shatter’d vessels and disabled oars;
But five tall barks the winds and water toss’d,
Far from their fellows, on the Ægyptian coast.
There wander’d Menelaus through foreign shores
Amassing gold, and gathering naval stores;
While cursed Ægysthus the detested deed
By fraud fulfilled, and his great brother bled.
Seven years, the traitor rich Mycenae sway’d,
And his stern rule the groaning land obey’d;
The eighth, from Athens to his realm restored,
Orestes brandish’d the avenging sword,
Slew the dire pair, and gave to funeral flame
The vile assassin and adulterous dame.
That day, ere yet the bloody triumphs cease,
Return’d Atrides to the coast of Greece,
And safe to Argos port his navy brought,
With gifts of price and ponderous treasure fraught.
Hence warn’d, my son, beware! nor idly stand
Too long a stranger to thy native land;
Lest heedless absence wear thy wealth away,
While lawless feasters in thy palace away;
Perhaps may seize thy realm, and share the spoil;
And though return, with disappointed toil,
From thy vain journey, to a rifled isle.
However, my friend, indulge one labour more,
And seek Atrides on the Spartan shore.
He, wandering long a wider circle made,
And many-languaged nations has survey’d:
And measured tracks unknown to other ships,
Amid the monstrous wonders of the deeps,
(A length of ocean and unbounded sky.
Which scarce the sea-fowl in a year o’erfly);
Go then; to Sparta take the watery way,
Thy ship and sailors but for orders stay;
Or, if my land then choose thy course to bend,
My steeds, my chariots, and my songs, attend;
Thee to Atrides they shall safe convey,
Guides of thy road, companions of thy way.
Urge him with truth to frame his wise replies,
And sure he will; for Menelaus is wise.”
Thus while he speaks the ruddy sun descends,
And twilight grey her evening shade extends.
Then thus the blue-eyed maid: “O full of days!
Wise are thy words, and just are all thy ways.
Now immolate the tongues, and mix the wine,
Sacred to Neptune and the powers divine,
The lamp of day is quench’d beneath the deep,
And soft approach the balmy hours of sleep;
Nor fits it to prolong the heavenly feast,
Timeless, indecent, but retire to rest.”

So spake Jove’s daughter, the celestial maid,
The sober train attended and obey’d.
The sacred heralds on their hands around
Pour’d the full urns; the youths the goblets crown’d;
From bowl to bowl the homely beverage flows;
While to the final sacrifice they rose.
The tongues they cast upon the fragrant flame,
And pour, above, the consecrated stream.
And now, their thirst by copious draughts allay’d,
The youthful hero and the Athenian maid
Propose departure from the finish’d rite,
And in their hollow bark to pass the night;
But this hospitable sage denied,
“Forbid it, Jove! and all the gods! (he cried),
Thus from my walls and the much-loved son to send
Of such a hero, and of such a friend!
Me, as some needy peasant, would ye leave,
Whom Heaven denies the blessing to relieve?
Me would ye leave, who boast imperial sway,
When beds of royal state invite your stay?
No—long as life this mortal shall inspire,
Or as my children imitate their sire.
Here shall the wandering stranger find his home,
And hospitable rites adorn the dome.”

“Well hast thou spoke (the blue-eyed maid replies),
Beloved old man! benevolent as wise.
Be the kind dictates of thy heart obey’d,
And let thy words Telemachus persuade:
He to thy palace shall thy steps pursue;
I to the ship, to give the orders due,
Prescribe directions and confirm the crew.
For I alone sustain their naval cares,
Who boast experience from these silver hairs;
All youths the rest, whom to this journey move
Like years, like tempers, and their prince’s love
There in the vessel shall I pass the night;
And, soon as morning paints the fields of light,
I go to challenge from the Caucons bold
A debt, contracted in the days of old,
But this, thy guest, received with friendly care
Let thy strong coursers swift to Sparta bear;
Prepare thy chariot at the dawn of day,
And be thy son companion of his way.”

Then, turning with the word, Minerva flies,
And soars an eagle through the liquid skies.
Vision divine! the throng’d spectators gaze
In holy wonder fix’d, and still amaze.
But chief the reverend sage admired; he took
The hand of young Telemachus, and spoke:
“Oh, happy youth! and favoured of the skies,
Distinguished care of guardian deities!
Whose early years for future worth engage,
No vulgar manhood, no ignoble age.
For lo! none other of the course above,
Then she, the daughter of almighty Jove,
Pallas herself, the war-triumphant maid;
Confess’d is thine, as once thy father’s aid.
So guide me, goddess! so propitious shine
On me, my consort, and my royal line!
A yearling bullock to thy name shall smoke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and yet tender horns,
Whose budding honours ductile gold adorns.”

Submissive thus the hoary sire preferr’d
His holy vow: the favouring goddess heard.
Then, slowly rising, o’er the sandy space
Precedes the father, follow’d by his race,
(A long procession) timely marching home
In comely order to the regal dome.
There when arrived, on thrones around him placed,
His sons and grandsons the wide circle graced.
To these the hospitable sage, in sign
Of social welcome, mix’d the racy wine
(Late from the mellowing cask restored to light,
By ten long years refined, and rosy bright).
To Pallas high the foaming bowl he crown’d,
And sprinkled large libations on the ground.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And slept beneath the pompous colonnade;
Fast by his side Pisistratus was spread
(In age his equal) on a splendid bed:
But in an inner court, securely closed,
The reverend Nestor and his queen reposed.

When now Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o’er the lawn,
The old man early rose, walk’d forth, and sate
On polish’d stone before his palace gate;
With unguents smooth the lucid marble shone,
Where ancient Neleus sate, a rustic throne;
But he descending to the infernal shade,
Sage Nestor fill’d it, and the sceptre sway’d.
His sons around him mild obeisance pay,
And duteous take the orders of the day.
First Echephron and Stratius quit their bed;
Then Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymed;
The last Pisistratus arose from rest:
They came, and near him placed the stranger-guest.
To these the senior thus declared his will:
“My sons! the dictates of your sire fulfil.
To Pallas, first of gods, prepare the feast,
Who graced our rites, a more than mortal guest
Let one, despatchful, bid some swain to lead
A well-fed bullock from the grassy mead;
One seek the harbour where the vessels moor,
And bring thy friends, Telemachus! ashore
(Leave only two the galley to attend);
Another Laerceus must we send,
Artist devine, whose skilful hands infold
The victim’s horn with circumfusile gold.
The rest may here the pious duty share,
And bid the handmaids for the feast prepare,
The seats to range, the fragrant wood to bring,
And limpid waters from the living spring.”

He said, and busy each his care bestow’d;
Already at the gates the bullock low’d,
Already came the Ithacensian crew,
The dexterous smith the tools already drew;
His ponderous hammer and his anvil sound,
And the strong tongs to turn the metal round.
Nor was Minerva absent from the rite,
She view’d her honours, and enjoyed the sight,
With reverend hand the king presents the gold,
Which round the intorted horns the gilder roll’d.
So wrought as Pallas might with pride behold.
Young Aretus from forth his bridal bower
Brought the full laver, o’er their hands to pour,
And canisters of consecrated flour.
Stratius and Echephron the victim led;
The axe was held by warlike Thrasymed,
In act to strike; before him Perseus stood,
The vase extending to receive the blood.
The king himself initiates to the power:
Scatters with quivering hand the sacred flour,
And the stream sprinkles; from the curling brows
The hair collected in the fire he throws.
Soon as due vows on every part were paid,
And sacred wheat upon the victim laid,
Strong Thrasymed discharged the speeding blow
Full on his neck, and cut the nerves in two.
Down sunk the heavy beast; the females round
Maids, wives, and matrons, mix a shrilling sound.
Nor scorned the queen the holy choir to join
(The first born she, of old Clymenus’ line:
In youth by Nestor loved, of spotless fame.
And loved in age, Eurydice her name).
From earth they rear him, struggling now with death;
And Nestor’s youngest stops the vents of breath.
The soul for ever flies; on all sides round
Streams the black blood, and smokes upon the ground
The beast they then divide and disunite
The ribs and limbs, observant of the rite:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The sacred sage before his altar stands,
Turns the burnt offering with his holy hands,
And pours the wine, and bids the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire.
The thighs now sacrificed, and entrails dress’d,
The assistants part, transfix, and broil the rest
While these officious tend the rites divine,
The last fair branch of the Nestorean line,
Sweet Polycaste, took the pleasing toil
To bathe the prince, and pour the fragrant oil.
O’er his fair limbs a flowery vest he threw,
And issued, like a god, to mortal view.
His former seat beside the king he found
(His people’s father with his peers around);
All placed at ease the holy banquet join,
And in the dazzling goblet laughs the wine.

The rage of thirst and hunger now suppress’d,
The monarch turns him to his royal guest;
And for the promised journey bids prepare
The smooth hair’d horses, and the rapid car.
Observant of his word, the word scarce spoke,
The sons obey, and join them to the yoke.
Then bread and wine a ready handmaid brings,
And presents, such as suit the state of kings.
The glittering seat Telemachus ascends;
His faithful guide Pisistratus attends;
With hasty hand the ruling reins he drew;
He lash’d the coursers, and the coursers flew.
Beneath the bounding yoke alike they hold
Their equal pace, and smoked along the field.
The towers of Pylos sink, its views decay,
Fields after fields fly back, till close of day;
Then sunk the sun, and darken’d all the way.

To Pherae now, Diocleus’ stately seat
(Of Alpheus’ race), the weary youths retreat.
His house affords the hospitable rite,
And pleased they sleep (the blessing of the night).
But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o’er the lawn,
Again they mount, their journey to renew,
And from the sounding portico they flew.
Along the waving fields their way they hold
The fields receding as their chariot roll’d;
Then slowly sunk the ruddy globe of light,
And o’er the shaded landscape rush’d the night.




BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.
THE CONFERENCE WITH MENELAUS.


Telemachus with Pisistratus arriving at Sparta, is hospitably received
by Menelaus to whom he relates the cause of his coming, and learns from
him many particulars of what befell the Greeks since the destruction of
Troy. He dwells more at large upon the prophecies of Proteus to him in
his return; from which he acquaints Telemachus that Ulysses is detained
in the island of Calypso.
    In the meantime the suitors consult to destroy Telemachus on the
    voyage home. Penelope is apprised of this; but comforted in a dream
    by Pallas, in the shape of her sister Iphthima.


And now proud Sparta with their wheels resounds,
Sparta whose walls a range of hills surrounds;
At the fair dome the rapid labour ends;
Where sate Atrides ’midst his bridal friends,
With double vows invoking Hymen’s power,
To bless his son’s and daughter’s nuptial hour.

That day, to great Achilles’ son resign’d,
Hermione, the fairest of her kind,
Was sent to crown the long-protracted joy,
Espoused before the final doom of Troy;
With steeds and gilded cars, a gorgeous train
Attend the nymphs to Phthia’s distant reign.
Meanwhile at home, to Megapenthe’s bed
The virgin choir Alector’s daughter led.
Brave Megapenthes from a stolen amour
To great Atrides’ age his handmaid bore;
To Helen’s bed the gods alone assign
Hermione, to extend the regal line;
On whom a radiant pomp of Graces wait,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.

While this gay friendly troop the king surround,
With festival and mirth the roofs resound;
A bard amid the joyous circle sings
High airs attemper’d to the vocal strings;
Whilst warbling to the varied strain, advance
Two sprightly youths to form the bounding dance,
’Twas then, that issuing through the palace gate,
The splendid car roll’d slow in regal state:
On the bright eminence young Nestor shone,
And fast beside him great Ulysses’ son;
Grave Eteoneus saw the pomp appear,
And speeding, thus address’d the royal ear;

“Two youths approach, whose semblant features prove
Their blood devolving from the source of Jove
Is due reception deign’d, or must they bend
Their doubtful course to seek a distant friend?”

“Insensate! (with a sigh the king replies,)
Too long, misjudging, have I thought thee wise
But sure relentless folly steels thy breast,
Obdurate to reject the stranger-guest;
To those dear hospitable rites a foe,
Which in my wanderings oft relieved my woe;
Fed by the bounty of another’s board,
Till pitying Jove my native realm restored—
Straight be the coursers from the car released,
Conduct the youths to grace the genial feast.”

The seneschal, rebuked, in haste withdrew;
With equal haste a menial train pursue:
Part led the coursers, from the car enlarged,
Each to a crib with choicest grain surcharged;
Part in a portico, profusely graced
With rich magnificence, the chariot placed;
Then to the dome the friendly pair invite,
Who eye the dazzling roofs with vast delight;
Resplendent as the blaze of summer noon,
Or the pale radiance of the midnight moon.
From room to room their eager view they bend
Thence to the bath, a beauteous pile, descend;
Where a bright damsel train attends the guests
With liquid odours, and embroider’d vests.
Refresh’d, they wait them to the bower of state,
Where, circled with his peers, Atrides sate;
Throned next the king, a fair attendant brings
The purest product of the crystal springs;
High on a massy vase of silver mould,
The burnish’d laver flames with solid gold,
In solid gold the purple vintage flows,
And on the board a second banquet rose.
When thus the king, with hospitable port;
“Accept this welcome to the Spartan court:
The waste of nature let the feast repair,
Then your high lineage and your names declare;
Say from what sceptred ancestry ye claim,
Recorded eminent in deathless fame,
For vulgar parents cannot stamp their race
With signatures of such majestic grace.”

Ceasing, benevolent he straight assigns
The royal portion of the choicest chines
To each accepted friend; with grateful haste
They share the honours of the rich repast.
Sufficed, soft whispering thus to Nestor’s son,
His head reclined, young Ithacus begun:

“View’st thou unmoved, O ever-honour’d most!
These prodigies of art, and wondrous cost!
Above, beneath, around the palace shines
The sunless treasure of exhausted mines;
The spoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And studded amber darts the golden ray;
Such, and not nobler, in the realms above
My wonder dictates is the dome of Jove.”

The monarch took the word, and grave replied:
“Presumptuous are the vaunts, and vain the pride
Of man, who dares in pomp with Jove contest,
Unchanged, immortal, and supremely blest!
With all my affluence, when my woes are weigh’d,
Envy will own the purchase dearly paid.
For eight slow-circling years, by tempests toss’d,
From Cypress to the far Phoenician coast
(Sidon the capital), I stretch’d my toil
Through regions fatten’d with the flows of Nile.
Next Aethiopia’s utmost bound explore,
And the parch’d borders of the Arabian shore;
Then warp my voyage on the southern gales,
O’er the warm Lybian wave to spread my sails;
That happy clime, where each revolving year
The teeming ewes a triple offspring bear;
And two fair crescents of translucent horn
The brows of all their young increase adorn:
The shepherd swains, with sure abundance blest,
On the fat flock and rural dainties feast;
Nor want of herbage makes the dairy fail,
But every season fills the foaming pail.
Whilst, heaping unwash’d wealth, I distant roam,
The best of brothers, at his natal home,
By the dire fury of a traitress wife,
Ends the sad evening of a stormy life;
Whence, with incessant grief my soul annoy’d,
These riches are possess’d, but not enjoy’d!
My wars, the copious theme of every tongue,
To you your fathers have recorded long.
How favouring Heaven repaid my glorious toils
With a sack’d palace, and barbaric spoils.
Oh! had the gods so large a boon denied
And life, the just equivalent supplied
To those brave warriors, who, with glory fired
Far from their country, in my cause expired!
Still in short intervals of pleasing woe.
Regardful of the friendly dues I owe,
I to the glorious dead, for ever dear!
Indulge the tribute of a grateful tear.
But oh! Ulysses—deeper than the rest
That sad idea wounds my anxious breast!
My heart bleeds fresh with agonizing pain;
The bowl and tasteful viands tempt in vain;
Nor sleep’s soft power can close my streaming eyes,
When imaged to my soul his sorrows rise.
No peril in my cause he ceased to prove,
His labours equall’d only by my love:
And both alike to bitter fortune born,
For him to suffer, and for me to mourn!
Whether he wanders on some friendly coast,
Or glides in Stygian gloom a pensive ghost,
No fame reveals; but, doubtful of his doom,
His good old sire with sorrow to the tomb
Declines his trembling steps; untimely care
Withers the blooming vigour of his heir;
And the chaste partner of his bed and throne
Wastes all her widow’d hours in tender moan.”

While thus pathetic to the prince he spoke,
From the brave youth the streaming passion broke;
Studious to veil the grief, in vain repress’d,
His face he shrouded with his purple vest.
The conscious monarch pierced the coy disguise,
And view’d his filial love with vast surprise:
Dubious to press the tender theme, or wait
To hear the youth inquire his father’s fate.
In this suspense bright Helen graced the room;
Before her breathed a gale of rich perfume.
So moves, adorn’d with each attractive grace,
The silver shafted goddess of the chase!
The seat of majesty Adraste brings,
With art illustrious, for the pomp of kings;
To spread the pall (beneath the regal chair)
Of softest wool, is bright Alcippe’s care.
A silver canister, divinely wrought,
In her soft hands the beauteous Phylo brought;
To Sparta’s queen of old the radiant vase
Alcandra gave, a pledge of royal grace;
For Polybus her lord (whose sovereign sway
The wealthy tribes of Pharian Thebes obey),
When to that court Atrides came, caress’d
With vast munificence the imperial guest:
Two lavers from the richest ore refined,
With silver tripods, the kind host assign’d;
And bounteous from the royal treasure told
Ten equal talents of refulgent gold.
Alcandra, consort of his high command,
A golden distaff gave to Helen’s hand;
And that rich vase, with living sculpture wrought,
Which heap’d with wool the beauteous Phylo brought
The silken fleece, impurpled for the loom,
Rivall’d the hyacinth in vernal bloom.
The sovereign seat then Jove born Helen press’d,
And pleasing thus her sceptred lord address’d:

“Who grace our palace now, that friendly pair,
Speak they their lineage, or their names declare?
Uncertain of the truth, yet uncontroll’d,
Hear me the bodings of my breast unfold.
With wonder wrapp’d on yonder check I trace
The feature of the Ulyssean race:
Diffused o’er each resembling line appear,
In just similitude, the grace and air
Of young Telemachus! the lovely boy,
Who bless’d Ulysses with a father’s joy,
What time the Greeks combined their social arms,
To avenge the stain of my ill-fated charms!”

“Just is thy thought, (the king assenting cries,)
Methinks Ulysses strikes my wondering eyes;
Full shines the father in the filial frame,
His port, his features, and his shape the same;
Such quick regards his sparkling eyes bestow;
Such wavy ringlets o’er his shoulders flow
And when he heard the long disastrous store
Of cares, which in my cause Ulysses bore;
Dismay’d, heart-wounded with paternal woes,
Above restraint the tide of sorrow rose;
Cautious to let the gushing grief appear,
His purple garment veil’d the falling tear.”

“See there confess’d (Pisistratus replies)
The genuine worth of Ithacus the wise!
Of that heroic sire the youth is sprung,
But modest awe hath chain’d his timorous tongue.
Thy voice, O king! with pleased attention heard,
Is like the dictates of a god revered.
With him, at Nestor’s high command, I came,
Whose age I honour with a parent’s name.
By adverse destiny constrained to sue
For counsel and redress, he sues to you
Whatever ill the friendless orphan bears,
Bereaved of parents in his infant years,
Still must the wrong’d Telemachus sustain,
If, hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain;
Affianced in your friendly power alone,
The youth would vindicate the vacant throne.”

“Is Sparta blest, and these desiring eyes
View my friend’s son? (the king exalting cries;)
Son of my friend, by glorious toils approved,
Whose sword was sacred to the man he loved;
Mirror of constant faith, revered and mourn’d—
When Troy was ruin’d, had the chief return’d,
No Greek an equal space had ere possess’d,
Of dear affection, in my grateful breast.
I, to confirm the mutual joys we shared,
For his abode a capital prepared;
Argos, the seat of sovereign rule, I chose;
Fair in the plan the future palace rose,
Where my Ulysses and his race might reign,
And portion to his tribes the wide domain,
To them my vassals had resign’d a soil,
With teeming plenty to reward their toil.
There with commutual zeal we both had strove
In acts of dear benevolence and love:
Brothers in peace, not rivals in command,
And death alone dissolved the friendly band!
Some envious power the blissful scene destroys;
Vanish’d are all the visionary joys;
The soul of friendship to my hope is lost,
Fated to wander from his natal coast!”

He ceased; a gush of grief began to rise:
Fast streams a tide from beauteous Helen’s eyes;
Fast for the sire the filial sorrows flow;
The weeping monarch swells the mighty woe;
Thy cheeks, Pisistratus, the tears bedew,
While pictured so thy mind appear’d in view,
Thy martial brother; on the Phrygian plain
Extended pale, by swarthy Memnon slain!
But silence soon the son of Nestor broke,
And melting with fraternal pity, spoke:

“Frequent, O king, was Nestor wont to raise
And charm attention with thy copious praise;
To crowd thy various gifts, the sage assign’d
The glory of a firm capacious mind;
With that superior attribute control
This unavailing impotence of soul,
Let not your roof with echoing grief resound,
Now for the feast the friendly bowl is crown’d;
But when, from dewy shade emerging bright,
Aurora streaks the sky with orient light,
Let each deplore his dead; the rites of woe
Are all, alas! the living can bestow;
O’er the congenial dust enjoin’d to shear
The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear.
Then, mingling in the mournful pomp with you,
I’ll pay my brother’s ghost a warrior’s due,
And mourn the brave Antilochus, a name
Not unrecorded in the rolls of fame;
With strength and speed superior form’d, in fight
To face the foe, or intercept his flight;
Too early snatch’d by fate ere known to me!
I boast a witness of his worth in thee.”

“Young and mature! (the monarch thus rejoins,)
In thee renew’d the soul of Nestor shines;
Form’d by the care of that consummate sage,
In early bloom an oracle of age.
Whene’er his influence Jove vouchsafes to shower,
To bless the natal and the nuptial hour;
From the great sire transmissive to the race,
The boon devolving gives distinguish’d grace.
Such, happy Nestor! was thy glorious doom,
Around thee, full of years, thy offspring bloom.
Expert of arms, and prudent in debate;
The gifts of Heaven to guard thy hoary state.
But now let each becalm his troubled breast,
Wash, and partake serene the friendly feast.
To move thy suit, Telemachus, delay,
Till heaven’s revolving lamp restores the day.”

He said, Asphalion swift the laver brings;
Alternate, all partake the grateful springs;
Then from the rites of purity repair,
And with keen gust the savoury viands share.
Meantime, with genial joy to warm the soul,
Bright Helen mix’d a mirth inspiring bowl;
Temper’d with drugs of sovereign use, to assuage
The boiling bosom of tumultuous rage;
To clear the cloudy front of wrinkled Care,
And dry the tearful sluices of Despair;
Charm’d with that virtuous draught, the exalted mind
All sense of woe delivers to the wind.
Though on the blazing pile his parent lay,
Or a loved brother groan’d his life away,
Or darling son, oppress’d by ruffian force,
Fell breathless at his feet, a mangled corse;
From morn to eve, impassive and serene,
The man entranced would view the dreadful scene.
These drugs, so friendly to the joys of life,
Bright Helen learn’d from Thone’s imperial wife;
Who sway’d the sceptre, where prolific Nile
With various simples clothes the fatten’d soil.
With wholesome herbage mix’d, the direful bane
Of vegetable venom taints the plain;
From Paeon sprung, their patron-god imparts
To all the Pharian race his healing arts.
The beverage now prepared to inspire the feast,
The circle thus the beauteous queen addressed:

“Throned in omnipotence, supremest Jove
Tempers the fates of human race above;
By the firm sanction of his sovereign will,
Alternate are decreed our good and ill.
To feastful mirth be this white hour assign’d.
And sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind
Myself, assisting in the social joy,
Will tell Ulysses’ bold exploit in Troy,
Sole witness of the deed I now declare
Speak you (who saw) his wonders in the war.

“Seam’d o’er with wounds, which his own sabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village slave,
The foe deceived, he pass’d the tented plain,
In Troy to mingle with the hostile train.
In this attire secure from searching eyes,
Till happily piercing through the dark disguise,
The chief I challenged; he, whose practised wit
Knew all the serpent mazes of deceit,
Eludes my search; but when his form I view’d
Fresh from the bath, with fragrant oils renew’d,
His limbs in military purple dress’d,
Each brightening grace the genuine Greek confess’d.
A previous pledge of sacred faith obtain’d,
Till he the lines and Argive fleet regain’d,
To keep his stay conceal’d; the chief declared
The plans of war against the town prepared.
Exploring then the secrets of the state,
He learn’d what best might urge the Dardan fate;
And, safe returning to the Grecian host,
Sent many a shade to Pluto’s dreary coast.
Loud grief resounded through the towers of Troy,
But my pleased bosom glow’d with secret joy:
For then, with dire remorse and conscious shame
I view’d the effects of that disastrous flame,
Which, kindled by the imperious queen of love,
Constrain’d me from my native realm to rove:
And oft in bitterness of soul deplored
My absent daughter and my dearer lord;
Admired among the first of human race,
For every gift of mind and manly grace.”

“Right well (replied the king) your speech displays
The matchless merit of the chief you praise:
Heroes in various climes myself have found,
For martial deeds and depth of thought renown’d;
But Ithacus, unrivall’d in his claim,
May boast a title to the loudest fame:
In battle calm he guides the rapid storm,
Wise to resolve, and patient to perform.
What wondrous conduct in the chief appear’d,
When the vast fabric of the steed we rear’d!
Some demon, anxious for the Trojan doom,
Urged you with great Deiphobus to come,
To explore the fraud; with guile opposed to guile.
Slow-pacing thrice around the insidious pile,
Each noted leader’s name you thrice invoke,
Your accent varying as their spouses spoke!
The pleasing sounds each latent warrior warm’d,
But most Tydides’ and my heart alarm’d:
To quit the steed we both impatient press
Threatening to answer from the dark recess.
Unmoved the mind of Ithacus remain’d;
And the vain ardours of our love restrain’d;
But Anticlus, unable to control,
Spoke loud the language of his yearning soul:
Ulysses straight, with indignation fired
(For so the common care of Greece required),
Firm to his lips his forceful hands applied,
Till on his tongue the fluttering murmurs died.
Meantime Minerva, from the fraudful horse,
Back to the court of Priam bent your course.”

“Inclement fate! (Telemachus replies,)
Frail is the boasted attribute of wise:
The leader mingling with the vulgar host,
Is in the common mass of matter lost!
But now let sleep the painful waste repair
Of sad reflection and corroding care.”
He ceased; the menial fair that round her wait,
At Helen’s beck prepare the room of state;
Beneath an ample portico they spread
The downy fleece to form the slumberous bed;
And o’er soft palls of purple grain unfold
Rich tapestry, stiff with interwoven gold:
Then, through the illumined dome, to balmy rest
The obsequious herald guides each princely guest;
While to his regal bower the king ascends,
And beauteous Helen on her lord attends.
Soon as the morn, in orient purple dress’d,
Unbarr’d the portal of the roseate east,
The monarch rose; magnificent to view,
The imperial mantle o’er his vest he threw;
The glittering zone athwart his shoulders cast,
A starry falchion low-depending graced;
Clasp’d on his feet the embroidered sandals shine;
And forth he moves, majestic and divine,
Instant to young Telemachus he press’d;
And thus benevolent his speech addressed:

“Say, royal youth, sincere of soul report
Whit cause hath led you to the Spartan court?
Do public or domestic care constrain
This toilsome voyage o’er the surgy main?”

“O highly-favour’d delegate of Jove!
(Replies the prince) inflamed with filial love,
And anxious hope, to hear my parent’s doom,
A suppliant to your royal court I come:
Our sovereign seat a lewd usurping race
With lawless riot and misrule disgrace;
To pamper’d insolence devoted fall
Prime of the flock, and choicest of the stall:
For wild ambition wings their bold desire,
And all to mount the imperial bed aspire.
But prostrate I implore, O king! relate
The mournful series of my father’s fate:
Each known disaster of the man disclose,
Born by his mother to a world of woes!
Recite them; nor in erring pity fear
To wound with storied grief the filial ear.
If e’er Ulysses, to reclaim your right,
Avow’d his zeal in council or in fight,
If Phrygian camps the friendly toils attest,
To the sire’s merit give the son’s request.”

Deep from his inmost soul Atrides sigh’d,
And thus, indignant, to the prince replied:
“Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero’s nuptial joys profane!
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion’s court invades,
Leaves in the fatal lair the tender fawns,
Climbs the green cliff, or feeds the flowery lawns:
Meantime return’d, with dire remorseless sway,
The monarch-savage rends the trembling prey.
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Ulysses soon shall reassert his claim.
O Jove supreme, whom gods and men revere!
And thou! to whom ’tis given to gild the sphere!
With power congenial join’d, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when contending on the Lesbian shore
His prowess Philomelidies confess’d,
And loud-acclaiming Greeks the victor bless’d;
Then soon the invaders of his bed and throne
Their love presumptuous shall with life atone.
With patient ear, O royal youth, attend
The storied labour of thy father’s friend:
Fruitful of deeds, the copious tale is long,
But truth severe shall dictate to my tongue:
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate.

“Long on the Egyptian coast by calms confined,
Heaven to my fleet refused a prosperous wind;
No vows had we preferr’d, nor victims slain!
For this the gods each favouring gale restrain
Jealous, to see their high behests obey’d;
Severe, if men the eternal rights evade.
High o’er a gulfy sea, the Pharian isle
Fronts the deep roar of disemboguing Nile:
Her distance from the shore, the course begun
At dawn, and ending with the setting sun,
A galley measures; when the stiffer gales
Rise on the poop, and fully stretch the sails.
There, anchor’d vessels safe in harbour lie,
Whilst limpid springs the failing cask supply.

“And now the twentieth sun, descending, laves
His glowing axle in the western waves:
Still with expanded sails we court in vain
Propitious winds to waft us o’er the main;
And the pale mariner at once deplores
His drooping vigour and exhausted stores.
When lo! a bright cerulean form appears,
Proteus her sire divine. With pity press’d,
Me sole the daughter of the deep address’d;
What time, with hunger pined, my absent mates
Roam the wide isle in search of rural cates,
Bait the barb’d steel, and from the fishy flood
Appease the afflictive fierce desire of food.”

“‘Whoe’er thou art (the azure goddess cries)
Thy conduct ill-deserves the praise of wise:
Is death thy choice, or misery thy boast,
That here inglorious, on a barren coast,
Thy brave associates droop, a meagre train,
With famine pale, and ask thy care in vain?’
“Struck with the loud reproach, I straight reply:
‘Whate’er thy title in thy native sky,
A goddess sure! for more than moral grace
Speaks thee descendant of ethereal race;
Deem not that here of choice my fleet remains;
Some heavenly power averse my stay constrains:
O, piteous of my fate, vouchsafe to show
(For what’s sequester’d from celestial view?)
What power becalms the innavigable seas?
What guilt provokes him, and what vows appease?’

“I ceased, when affable the goddess cried:
‘Observe, and in the truths I speak confide;
The oracular seer frequents the Pharian coast,
From whose high bed my birth divine I boast;
Proteus, a name tremendous o’er the main,
The delegate of Neptune’s watery reign.
Watch with insidious care his known abode;
There fast in chains constrain the various god;
Who bound, obedient to superior force,
Unerring will prescribe your destined course.
If, studious on your realms, you then demand
Their state, since last you left your natal land,
Instant the god obsequious will disclose
Bright tracts of glory or a cloud of woes.’

“She ceased; and suppliant thus I made reply:
‘O goddess! on thy aid my hopes rely;
Dictate propitious to my duteous ear,
What arts can captivate the changeful seer;
For perilous the assay, unheard the toil,
To elude the prescience of a god by guile.’

“Thus to the goddess mild my suit I end.
Then she: ‘Obedient to my rule attend:
When through the zone of heaven the mounted sun
Hath journeyed half, and half remains to run;
The seer, while zephyrs curl the swelling deep,
Basks on the breezy shore, in grateful sleep,
His oozy limbs. Emerging from the wave,
The Phocas swift surround his rocky cave,
Frequent and full; the consecrated train
Of her, whose azure trident awes the main;
There wallowing warm, the enormous herd exhales
An oily steam, and taints the noontide gales.
To that recess, commodious for surprise,
When purple light shall next suffuse the skies,
With me repair; and from thy warrior-band
Three chosen chiefs of dauntless soul command;
Let their auxiliar force befriend the toil;
For strong the god, and perfected in guile.
Stretch’d on the shelly shore, he first surveys
The flouncing herd ascending from the seas;
Their number summ’d, reposed in sleep profound
The scaly charge their guardian god surround;
So with his battening flocks the careful swain
Abides pavilion’d on the grassy plain.
With powers united, obstinately bold,
Invade him, couch’d amid the scaly fold;
Instant he wears, elusive of the rape,
The mimic force of every savage shape;
Or glides with liquid lapse a murmuring stream,
Or, wrapp’d in flame, he glows at every limb.
Yet, still retentive, with redoubled might,
Through each vain passive form constrain his flight
But when, his native shape renamed, he stands
Patient of conquest, and your cause demands;
The cause that urged the bold attempt declare,
And soothe the vanquish’d with a victor’s prayer.
The bands releas’d, implore the seer to say
What godhead interdicts the watery way.
Who, straight propitious, in prophetic strain
Will teach you to repass the unmeasured main.’
She ceased, and bounding from the shelfy shore,
Round the descending nymph the waves resounding roar.

“High wrapp’d in wonder of the future deed,
with joy impetuous to the port I speed:
The wants of nature with repast suffice,
Till night with grateful shade involved the skies,
And shed ambrosial dews. Fast by the deep,
Along the tented shore, in balmy sleep,
Our cares were lost. When o’er the eastern lawn,
In saffron robes, the daughter of the dawn
Advanced her rosy steps, before the bay
Due ritual honours to the gods I pay;
Then seek the place the sea-born nymph assign’d,
With three associates of undaunted mind.
Arrived, to form along the appointed strand
For each a bed, she scoops the hilly sand;
Then, from her azure cave the finny spoils
Of four vast Phocae takes, to veil her wiles;
Beneath the finny spoils extended prone,
Hard toil! the prophet’s piercing eye to shun;
New from the corse, the scaly frauds diffuse
Unsavoury stench of oil, and brackish ooze;
But the bright sea-maid’s gentle power implored,
With nectar’d drops the sickening sense restored.

“Thus till the sun had travell’d half the skies,
Ambush’d we lie, and wait the bold emprise;
When, thronging quick to bask in open air,
The flocks of ocean to the strand repair;
Couch’d on the sunny sand, the monsters sleep;
Then Proteus, mounting from the hoary deep,
Surveys his charge, unknowing of deceit;
(In order told, we make the sum complete.)
Pleased with the false review, secure he lies,
And leaden slumbers press his drooping eyes.
Rushing impetuous forth, we straight prepare
A furious onset with the sound of war,
And shouting seize the god; our force to evade,
His various arts he soon resumes in aid;
A lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden our hands a spotted pard restrain;
Then, arm’d with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
A boar’s obscener shape the god belies;
On spiry volumes, there a dragon rides;
Here, from our strict embrace a stream he glides.
At last, sublime, his stately growth he rears
A tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
Vain efforts with superior power compress’d,
Me with reluctance thus the seer address’d;
‘Say, son of Atreus, say what god inspired
This daring fraud, and what the boon desired?’
I thus: ‘O thou, whose certain eye foresees
The fix’d event of fate’s remote decrees;
After long woes, and various toil endured,
Still on this desert isle my fleet is moor’d,
Unfriended of the gales. All-knowing, say,
What godhead interdicts the watery way?
What vows repentant will the power appease,
To speed a prosperous voyage o’er the seas.’

“‘To Jove (with stern regard the god replies)
And all the offended synod of the skies,
Just hecatombs with due devotion slain,
Thy guilt absolved, a prosperous voyage gain.
To the firm sanction of thy fate attend!
An exile thou, nor cheering face of friend,
Nor sight of natal shore, nor regal dome,
Shalt yet enjoy, but still art doom’d to roam.
Once more the Nile, who from the secret source
Of Jove’s high seat descends with sweepy force,
Must view his billows white beneath thy oar,
And altars blaze along his sanguine shore.
Then will the gods with holy pomp adored,
To thy long vows a safe return accord.’

“He ceased: heart wounded with afflictive pain,
(Doom’d to repeat the perils of the main,
A shelfy track and long!) ‘O seer’ I cry,
‘To the stern sanction of the offended sky
My prompt obedience bows. But deign to say
What fate propitious, or what dire dismay,
Sustain those peers, the relics of our host,
Whom I with Nestor on the Phrygian coast
Embracing left? Must I the warriors weep,
Whelm’d in the bottom of the monstrous deep?
Or did the kind domestic friend deplore
The breathless heroes on their native shore?

“‘Press not too far,’ replied the god: ‘but cease
To know what, known, will violate thy peace;
Too curious of their doom! with friendly woe
Thy breast will heave, and tears eternal flow.
Part live! the rest, a lamentable train!
Range the dark bounds of Pluto’s dreary reign.
Two, foremost in the roll of Mars renown’d,
Whose arms with conquest in thy cause were crown’d,
Fell by disastrous fate: by tempests toss’d,
A third lives wretched on a distant coast.

“By Neptune rescued from Minerva’s hate,
On Gyrae, safe Oilean Ajax sate,
His ship o’erwhelm’d; but, frowning on the floods,
Impious he roar’d defiance to the gods;
To his own prowess all the glory gave:
The power defrauding who vouchsafed to save.
This heard the raging ruler of the main;
His spear, indignant for such high disdain,
He launched; dividing with his forky mace
The aërial summit from the marble base:
The rock rush’d seaward, with impetuous roar
Ingulf’d, and to the abyss the boaster bore.

“By Juno’s guardian aid, the watery vast,
Secure of storms, your royal brother pass’d,
Till, coasting nigh the cape where Malen shrouds
Her spiry cliffs amid surrounding clouds,
A whirling gust tumultuous from the shore
Across the deep his labouring vessel bore.
In an ill-fated hour the coast he gain’d,
Where late in regal pomp Thyestes reigned;
But, when his hoary honours bow’d to fate,
Ægysthus govern’d in paternal state,
The surges now subside, the tempest ends;
From his tall ship the king of men descends;
There fondly thinks the gods conclude his toil:
Far from his own domain salutes the soil;
With rapture oft the verge of Greece reviews,
And the dear turf with tears of joy bedews.
Him, thus exulting on the distant stand,
A spy distinguish’d from his airy stand;
To bribe whose vigilance, Ægysthus told
A mighty sum of ill-persuading gold:
There watch’d this guardian of his guilty fear,
Till the twelfth moon had wheel’d her pale career;
And now, admonish’d by his eye, to court
With terror wing’d conveys the dread report.
Of deathful arts expert, his lord employs
The ministers of blood in dark surprise;
And twenty youths, in radiant mail incased,
Close ambush’d nigh the spacious hall he placed.
Then bids prepare the hospitable treat:
Vain shows of love to veil his felon hate!
To grace the victor’s welcome from the wars,
A train of coursers and triumphal cars
Magnificent he leads: the royal guest,
Thoughtless of ill, accepts the fraudful feast.
The troop forth-issuing from the dark recess,
With homicidal rage the king oppress!
So, whilst he feeds luxurious in the stall,
The sovereign of the herd is doomed to fall,
The partners of his fame and toils at Troy,
Around their lord, a mighty ruin, lie:
Mix’d with the brave, the base invaders bleed;
Ægysthus sole survives to boast the deed.’

“He said: chill horrors shook my shivering soul,
Rack’d with convulsive pangs in dust I roll;
And hate, in madness of extreme despair,
To view the sun, or breathe the vital air.
But when, superior to the rage of woe,
I stood restored and tears had ceased to flow,
Lenient of grief the pitying god began:
‘Forget the brother, and resume the man.
To Fate’s supreme dispose the dead resign,
That care be Fate’s, a speedy passage thine
Still lives the wretch who wrought the death deplored,
But lives a victim for thy vengeful sword;
Unless with filial rage Orestes glow,
And swift prevent the meditated blow:
You timely will return a welcome guest,
With him to share the sad funereal feast.’

“He said: new thoughts my beating heart employ,
My gloomy soul receives a gleam of joy.
Fair hope revives; and eager I address’d
The prescient godhead to reveal the rest:
‘The doom decreed of those disastrous two
I’ve heard with pain, but oh! the tale pursue;
What third brave son of Mars the Fates constrain
To roam the howling desert of the main;
Or, in eternal shade of cold he lies,
Provoke new sorrows from these grateful eyes.’

“‘That chief (rejoin’d the god) his race derives
From Ithaca, and wondrous woes survives;
Laertes’ son: girt with circumfluous tides,
He still calamitous constraint abides.
Him in Calypso’s cave of late I view’d,
When streaming grief his faded cheek bedow’d.
But vain his prayer, his arts are vain, to move
The enamour’d goddess, or elude her love:
His vessel sunk, and dear companions lost,
He lives reluctant on a foreign coast.
But oh, beloved by Heaven! reserved to thee
A happier lot the smiling Fates decree:
Free from that law, beneath whose mortal sway
Matter is changed, and varying forms decay,
Elysium shall be thine: the blissful plains
Of utmost earth, where Rhadamanthus reigns.
Joys ever young, unmix’d with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of the eternal year:
Stern winter smiles on that auspicious clime:
The fields are florid with unfading prime;
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
Mould the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow;
But from the breezy deep the blest inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the western gale.
This grace peculiar will the gods afford
To thee, the son of Jove, and beauteous Helen’s lord.’

“He ceased, and plunging in the vast profound,
Beneath the god and whirling billows bound.
Then speeding back, involved in various thought,
My friends attending at the shore I sought,
Arrived, the rage of hunger we control
Till night with silent shade invests the pole;
Then lose the cares of life in pleasing rest.
Soon as the morn reveals the roseate east,
With sails we wing the masts, our anchors weigh,
Unmoor the fleet, and rush into the sea.
Ranged on the banks, beneath our equal oars
White curl the waves, and the vex’d ocean roars
Then, steering backward from the Pharian isle,
We gain the stream of Jove-descended Nile;
There quit the ships, and on the destined shore
With ritual hecatombs the gods adore;
Their wrath atoned, to Agamemnon’s name
A cenotaph I raise of deathless fame.
These rites to piety and grief discharged,
The friendly gods a springing gale enlarged;
The fleet swift tilting o’er the surges flew,
Till Grecian cliffs appear’d a blissful view!

“Thy patient ear hath heard me long relate
A story, fruitful of disastrous fate.
And now, young prince, indulge my fond request;
Be Sparta honoured with his royal guest,
Till, from his eastern goal, the joyous sun
His twelfth diurnal race begins to run.
Meantime my train the friendly gifts prepare,
The sprightly coursers and a polish’d car;
With these a goblet of capacious mould,
Figured with art to dignify the gold
(Form’d for libation to the gods), shall prove
A pledge and monument of sacred love.”

“My quick return (young Ithacus rejoin’d),
Damps the warm wishes of my raptured mind;
Did not my fate my needful haste constrain,
Charm’d by your speech so graceful and humane,
Lost in delight the circling year would roll,
While deep attention fix’d my listening soul.
But now to Pyle permit my destined way,
My loved associates chide my long delay:
In dear remembrance of your royal grace,
I take the present of the promised vase;
The coursers, for the champaign sports retain;
That gift our barren rocks will render vain:
Horrid with cliffs, our meagre land allows
Thin herbage for the mountain goat to browse,
But neither mead nor plain supplies, to feed
The sprightly courser, or indulge his speed:
To sea-surrounded realms the gods assign
Small tract of fertile lawn, the least to mine.”

His hand the king with tender passion press’d,
And, smiling, thus the royal youth address’d:
“O early worth! a soul so wise, and young,
Proclaims you from the sage Ulysses sprung.
Selected from my stores, of matchless price,
An urn shall recompense your prudent choice;
By Vulcan’s art, the verge with gold enchased.
A pledge the sceptred power of Sidon gave,
When to his realm I plough’d the orient wave.”

Thus they alternate; while, with artful care,
The menial train the regal feast prepare.
The firstlings of the flock are doom’d to die:
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl supply;
A female band the gift of Ceres bring;
And the gilt roofs with genial triumph ring.

Meanwhile, in Ithaca, the suitor powers
In active games divide their jovial hours;
In areas varied with mosaic art,
Some whirl the disk, and some the javelin dart,
Aside, sequester’d from the vast resort,
Antinous sole spectator of the sport;
With great Eurymachus, of worth confess’d,
And high descent, superior to the rest;
Whom young Noëmon lowly thus address’d:—

“My ship, equipp’d within the neighboring port,
The prince, departing for the Pylian court,
Requested for his speed; but, courteous, say
When steers he home, or why this long delay?
For Elis I should sail with utmost speed,
To import twelve mares which there luxurious feed,
And twelve young mules, a strong laborious race,
New to the plow, unpractised in the trace.”

Unknowing of the course to Pyle design’d,
A sudden horror seized on either mind;
The prince in rural bower they fondly thought,
Numbering his flocks and herds, not far remote.
“Relate (Antinous cries), devoid of guile,
When spread the prince his sale for distant Pyle?
Did chosen chiefs across the gulfy main
Attend his voyage, or domestic train?
Spontaneous did you speed his secret course,
Or was the vessel seized by fraud or force?”

“With willing duty, not reluctant mind
(Noëmon cried), the vessel was resign’d,
Who, in the balance, with the great affairs
Of courts presume to weigh their private cares?
With him, the peerage next in power to you;
And Mentor, captain of the lordly crew,
Or some celestial in his reverend form,
Safe from the secret rock and adverse storm,
Pilots the course; for when the glimmering ray
Of yester dawn disclosed the tender day,
Mentor himself I saw, and much admired,”
Then ceased the youth, and from the court retired.

Confounded and appall’d, the unfinish’d game
The suitors quit, and all to council came.
Antinous first the assembled peers address’d.
Rage sparkling in his eyes, and burning in his breast

“O shame to manhood! shall one daring boy
The scheme of all our happiness destroy?
Fly unperceived, seducing half the flower
Of nobles, and invite a foreign power?
The ponderous engine raised to crush us all,
Recoiling, on his head is sure to fall.
Instant prepare me, on the neighbouring strand,
With twenty chosen mates a vessel mann’d;
For ambush’d close beneath the Samian shore
His ship returning shall my spies explore;
He soon his rashness shall with life atone,
Seek for his father’s fate, but find his own.”

With vast applause the sentence all approve;
Then rise, and to the feastful hall remove;
Swift to the queen the herald Medon ran,
Who heard the consult of the dire divan:
Before her dome the royal matron stands,
And thus the message of his haste demands;

“What will the suitors? must my servant-train
The allotted labours of the day refrain,
For them to form some exquisite repast?
Heaven grant this festival may prove their last!
Or, if they still must live, from me remove
The double plague of luxury and love!
Forbear, ye sons of insolence! forbear,
In riot to consume a wretched heir.
In the young soul illustrious thought to raise,
Were ye not tutor’d with Ulysses’ praise?
Have not your fathers oft my lord defined,
Gentle of speech, beneficent of mind?
Some kings with arbitrary rage devour,
Or in their tyrant-minions vest the power;
Ulysses let no partial favours fall,
The people’s parent, he protected all;
But absent now, perfidious and ingrate!
His stores ye ravage, and usurp his state.”

He thus: “O were the woes you speak the worst!
They form a deed more odious and accursed;
More dreadful than your boding soul divines;
But pitying Jove avert the dire designs!
The darling object of your royal care
Is marked to perish in a deathful snare;
Before he anchors in his native port,
From Pyle re-sailing and the Spartan court;
Horrid to speak! in ambush is decreed
The hope and heir of Ithaca to bleed!”

Sudden she sunk beneath the weighty woes,
The vital streams a chilling horror froze;
The big round tear stands trembling in her eye,
And on her tongue imperfect accents die.
At length in tender language interwove
With sighs, she thus expressed her anxious love;
“Why rarely would my son his fate explore,
Ride the wild waves, and quit the safer shore?
Did he with all the greatly wretched, crave
A blank oblivion, and untimely grave?”

“Tis not (replied the sage) to Medon given
To know, if some inhabitant of heaven
In his young breast the daring thought inspired
Or if, alone with filial duty fired,
The winds and waves he tempts in early bloom,
Studious to learn his absent father’s doom.”

The sage retired: unable to control
The mighty griefs that swell her labouring soul
Rolling convulsive on the floor is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate queen.
Words to her dumb complaint a pause supplies,
And breath, to waste in unavailing cries.
Around their sovereign wept the menial fair,
To whom she thus address’d her deep despair:

“Behold a wretch whom all the gods consign
To woe! Did ever sorrows equal mine?
Long to my joys my dearest lord is lost,
His country’s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
Now from my fond embrace, by tempests torn,
Our other column of the state is borne;
Nor took a kind adieu, nor sought consent!—
Unkind confederates in his dire intent!
Ill suits it with your shows of duteous zeal,
From me the purposed voyage to conceal;
Though at the solemn midnight hour he rose,
Why did you fear to trouble my repose?
He either had obey’d my fond desire,
Or seen his mother pierced with grief expire.
Bid Dolius quick attend, the faithful slave
Whom to my nuptial train Icarius gave
To tend the fruit groves: with incessant speed
He shall this violence of death decreed
To good Laertes tell. Experienced age
May timely intercept the ruffian rage.
Convene the tribes the murderous plot reveal,
And to their power to save his race appeal.”

Then Euryclea thus: “My dearest dread;
Though to the sword I bow this hoary head,
Or if a dungeon be the pain decreed,
I own me conscious of the unpleasing deed;
Auxiliar to his flight, my aid implored,
With wine and viands I the vessel stored;
A solemn oath, imposed, the secret seal’d,
Till the twelfth dawn the light of day reveal’d.
Dreading the effect of a fond mother’s fear,
He dared not violate your royal ear.
But bathe, and, in imperial robes array’d,
Pay due devotions to the martial maid,
And rest affianced in her guardian aid.
Send not to good Laertes, nor engage
In toils of state the miseries of age:
Tis impious to surmise the powers divine
To ruin doom the Jove-descended line;
Long shall the race of just Arcesius reign,
And isles remote enlarge his old domain.”

The queen her speech with calm attention hears,
Her eyes restrain the silver-streaming tears:
She bathes, and robed, the sacred dome ascends;
Her pious speed a female train attends:
The salted cakes in canisters are laid,
And thus the queen invokes Minerva’s aid;

“Daughter divine of Jove, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
If e’er Ulysses to thy fane preferr’d
The best and choicest of his flock and herd;
Hear, goddess, hear, by those oblations won;
And for the pious sire preserve the son;
His wish’d return with happy power befriend,
And on the suitors let thy wrath descend.”

She ceased; shrill ecstasies of joy declare
The favouring goddess present to the prayer;
The suitors heard, and deem’d the mirthful voice
A signal of her hymeneal choice;
Whilst one most jovial thus accosts the board:

“Too late the queen selects a second lord;
In evil hour the nuptial rite intends,
When o’er her son disastrous death impends.”
Thus he, unskill’d of what the fates provide!
But with severe rebuke Antinous cried:

“These empty vaunts will make the voyage vain:
Alarm not with discourse the menial train:
The great event with silent hope attend,
Our deeds alone our counsel must commend.”
His speech thus ended short, he frowning rose,
And twenty chiefs renowned for valour chose;
Down to the strand he speeds with haughty strides,
Where anchor’d in the bay the vessel rides,
Replete with mail and military store,
In all her tackle trim to quit the shore.
The desperate crew ascend, unfurl the sails
(The seaward prow invites the tardy gales);
Then take repast till Hesperus display’d
His golden circlet, in the western shade.

Meantime the queen, without reflection due,
Heart-wounded, to the bed of state withdrew:
In her sad breast the prince’s fortunes roll,
And hope and doubt alternate seize her soul.
So when the woodman’s toil her cave surrounds,
And with the hunter’s cry the grove resounds,
With grief and rage the mother-lion stung,
Fearless herself, yet trembles for her young,
While pensive in the silent slumberous shade,
Sleep’s gentle powers her drooping eyes invade;
Minerva, life-like, on embodied air
Impress’d the form of Iphthima the fair;
(Icarius’ daughter she, whose blooming charms
Allured Eumelus to her virgin arms;
A sceptred lord, who o’er the fruitful plain
Of Thessaly wide stretched his ample reign:)
As Pallas will’d, along the sable skies,
To calm the queen, the phantom sister flies.
Swift on the regal dome, descending right,
The bolted valves are pervious to her flight.
Close to her head the pleasing vision stands,
And thus performs Minerva’s high commands

“O why, Penelope, this causeless fear,
To render sleep’s soft blessing unsincere?
Alike devote to sorrow’s dire extreme
The day-reflection, and the midnight-dream!
Thy son the gods propitious will restore,
And bid thee cease his absence to deplore.”

To whom the queen (whilst yet in pensive mind
Was in the silent gates of sleep confined):
“O sister to my soul forever dear,
Why this first visit to reprove my fear?
How in a realm so distant should you know
From what deep source my ceaseless sorrows flow?
To all my hope my royal lord is lost,
His country’s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
And with consummate woe to weigh me down,
The heir of all his honours and his crown,
My darling son is fled! an easy prey
To the fierce storms, or men more fierce than they;
Who, in a league of blood associates sworn,
Will intercept the unwary youth’s return.”

“Courage resume (the shadowy form replied);
In the protecting care of Heaven confide;
On him attends the blue eyed martial maid:
What earthly can implore a surer aid?
Me now the guardian goddess deigns to send,
To bid thee patient his return attend.”

The queen replies: “If in the blest abodes,
A goddess, thou hast commerce with the gods;
Say, breathes my lord the blissful realm of light,
Or lies he wrapp’d in ever-during night?”

“Inquire not of his doom, (the phantom cries,)
I speak not all the counsel of the skies;
Nor must indulge with vain discourse, or long,
The windy satisfaction of the tongue.”

Swift through the valves the visionary fair
Repass’d, and viewless mix’d with common air.
The queen awakes, deliver’d of her woes;
With florid joy her heart dilating glows:
The vision, manifest of future fate,
Makes her with hope her son’s arrival wait.

Meantime the suitors plough the watery plain,
Telemachus in thought already slain!
When sight of lessening Ithaca was lost
Their sail directed for the Samian coast
A small but verdant isle appear’d in view,
And Asteris the advancing pilot knew;
An ample port the rocks projected form,
To break the rolling waves and ruffling storm:
That safe recess they gain with happy speed,
And in close ambush wait the murderous deed.




BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.
THE DEPARTURE OF ULYSSES FROM CALYPSO


Pallas in a council of the gods complains of the detention of Ulysses
in the Island of Calypso: whereupon Mercury is sent to command his
removal. The seat of Calypso described. She consents with much
difficulty; and Ulysses builds a vessel with his own hands, in which he
embarks. Neptune overtakes him with a terrible tempest, in which he is
shipwrecked, and in the last danger of death; till Lencothea, a
sea-goddess, assists him, and, after innumerable perils, he gets ashore
on Phæacia.


The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus’ bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light.
Then met the eternal synod of the sky,
Before the god, who thunders from on high,
Supreme in might, sublime in majesty.
Pallas, to these, deplores the unequal fates
Of wise Ulysses and his toils relates:
Her hero’s danger touch’d the pitying power,
The nymph’s seducements, and the magic bower.
Thus she began her plaint: “Immortal Jove!
And you who fill the blissful seats above!
Let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
Or bless a people willing to obey,
But crush the nations with an iron rod,
And every monarch be the scourge of God.
If from your thoughts Ulysses you remove,
Who ruled his subjects with a father’s love,
Sole in an isle, encircled by the main,
Abandon’d, banish’d from his native reign,
Unbless’d he sighs, detained by lawless charms,
And press’d unwilling in Calypso’s arms.
Nor friends are there, nor vessels to convey,
Nor oars to cut the immeasurable way.
And now fierce traitors, studious to destroy
His only son, their ambush’d fraud employ;
Who, pious, following his great father’s fame,
To sacred Pylos and to Sparta came.”

“What words are these? (replied the power who forms
The clouds of night, and darkens heaven with storms;)
Is not already in thy soul decreed,
The chief’s return shall make the guilty bleed?
What cannot Wisdom do? Thou may’st restore
The son in safety to his native shore;
While the fell foes, who late in ambush lay,
With fraud defeated measure back their way.”

Then thus to Hermes the command was given:
“Hermes, thou chosen messenger of heaven!
Go, to the nymph be these our orders borne
’Tis Jove’s decree, Ulysses shall return:
The patient man shall view his old abodes,
Nor helped by mortal hand, nor guiding gods
In twice ten days shall fertile Scheria find,
Alone, and floating to the wave and wind.
The bold Phæacians there, whose haughty line
Is mixed with gods, half human, half divine,
The chief shall honour as some heavenly guest,
And swift transport him to his place of rest,
His vessels loaded with a plenteous store
Of brass, of vestures, and resplendent ore
(A richer prize than if his joyful isle
Received him charged with Ilion’s noble spoil),
His friends, his country, he shall see, though late:
Such is our sovereign will, and such is fate.”

He spoke. The god who mounts the winged winds
Fast to his feet the golden pinions binds,
That high through fields of air his flight sustain
O’er the wide earth, and o’er the boundless main:
He grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye;
Then shoots from heaven to high Pieria’s steep,
And stoops incumbent on the rolling deep.
So watery fowl, that seek their fishy food,
With wings expanded o’er the foaming flood,
Now sailing smooth the level surface sweep,
Now dip their pinions in the briny deep;
Thus o’er the world of waters Hermes flew,
Till now the distant island rose in view:
Then, swift ascending from the azure wave,
He took the path that winded to the cave.
Large was the grot, in which the nymph he found
(The fair-hair’d nymph with every beauty crown’d).
The cave was brighten’d with a rising blaze;
Cedar and frankincense, an odorous pile,
Flamed on the hearth, and wide perfumed the isle;
While she with work and song the time divides,
And through the loom the golden shuttle guides.
Without the grot a various sylvan scene
Appear’d around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering play’d,
And nodding cypress form’d a fragrant shade:
On whose high branches, waving with the storm,
The birds of broadest wing their mansions form,—
The chough, the sea-mew, the loquacious crow,—
and scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.
Depending vines the shelving cavern screen.
With purple clusters blushing through the green.
Four limpid fountains from the clefts distil:
And every fountain pours a several rill,
In mazy windings wandering down the hill:
Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crown’d,
And glowing violets threw odours round.
A scene, where, if a god should cast his sight,
A god might gaze, and wander with delight!
Joy touch’d the messenger of heaven: he stay’d
Entranced, and all the blissful haunts surveyed.
Him, entering in the cave, Calypso knew;
For powers celestial to each other’s view
Stand still confess’d, though distant far they lie
To habitants of earth, or sea, or sky.
But sad Ulysses, by himself apart,
Pour’d the big sorrows of his swelling heart;
All on the lonely shore he sate to weep,
And roll’d his eyes around the restless deep:
Toward his loved coast he roll’d his eyes in vain,
Till, dimm’d with rising grief, they stream’d again.

Now graceful seated on her shining throne,
To Hermes thus the nymph divine begun:

“God of the golden wand! on what behest
Arrivest thou here, an unexpected guest?
Loved as thou art, thy free injunctions lay;
’Tis mine with joy and duty to obey.
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of my bower.”

Thus having spoke, the nymph the table spread
(Ambrosial cates, with nectar rosy-red);
Hermes the hospitable rite partook,
Divine refection! then, recruited, spoke:

“What moves this journey from my native sky,
A goddess asks, nor can a god deny.
Hear then the truth. By mighty Jove’s command
Unwilling have I trod this pleasing land:
For who, self-moved, with weary wing would sweep
Such length of ocean and unmeasured deep;
A world of waters! far from all the ways
Where men frequent, or sacred altars blaze!
But to Jove’s will submission we must pay;
What power so great to dare to disobey?
A man, he says, a man resides with thee,
Of all his kind most worn with misery.
The Greeks, (whose arms for nine long year employ’d
Their force on Ilion, in the tenth destroy’d,)
At length, embarking in a luckless hour,
With conquest proud, incensed Minerva’s power:
Hence on the guilty race her vengeance hurl’d,
With storms pursued them through the liquid world.
There all his vessels sunk beneath the wave!
There all his dear companions found their grave!
Saved from the jaws of death by Heaven’s decree,
The tempest drove him to these shores and thee.
Him, Jove now orders to his native lands
Straight to dismiss: so destiny commands:
Impatient Fate his near return attends,
And calls him to his country, and his friends.”

E’en to her inmost soul the goddess shook;
Then thus her anguish, and her passion broke:
“Ungracious gods! with spite and envy cursed!
Still to your own ethereal race the worst!
Ye envy mortal and immortal joy,
And love, the only sweet of life destroy,
Did ever goddess by her charms engage
A favour’d mortal, and not feel your rage?
So when Aurora sought Orion’s love,
Her joys disturbed your blissful hours above,
Till, in Ortygia Dian’s winged dart
Had pierced the hapless hunter to the heart,
So when the covert of the thrice-eared field
Saw stately Ceres to her passion yield,
Scarce could Iasion taste her heavenly charms,
But Jove’s swift lightning scorched him in her arms.
And is it now my turn, ye mighty powers!
Am I the envy of your blissful bowers?
A man, an outcast to the storm and wave,
It was my crime to pity, and to save;
When he who thunders rent his bark in twain,
And sunk his brave companions in the main,
Alone, abandon’d, in mid-ocean tossed,
The sport of winds, and driven from every coast,
Hither this man of miseries I led,
Received the friendless, and the hungry fed;
Nay promised (vainly promised) to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe.
’Tis past-and Jove decrees he shall remove;
Gods as we are, we are but slaves to Jove.
Go then he must (he must, if he ordain,
Try all those dangers, all those deeps, again);
But never, never shall Calypso send
To toils like these her husband and her friend.
What ships have I, what sailors to convey,
What oars to cut the long laborious way?
Yet I’ll direct the safest means to go;
That last advice is all I can bestow.”

To her the power who hears the charming rod;
“Dismiss the man, nor irritate the god;
Prevent the rage of him who reigns above,
For what so dreadful as the wrath of Jove?”
Thus having said, he cut the cleaving sky,
And in a moment vanished from her eye,
The nymph, obedient to divine command,
To seek Ulysses, paced along the sand,
Him pensive on the lonely beach she found,
With streaming eyes in briny torrents drown’d,
And inly pining for his native shore;
For now the soft enchantress pleased no more;
For now, reluctant, and constrained by charms,
Absent he lay in her desiring arms,
In slumber wore the heavy night away,
On rocks and shores consumed the tedious day;
There sate all desolate, and sighed alone,
With echoing sorrows made the mountains groan.
And roll’d his eyes o’er all the restless main,
Till, dimmed with rising grief, they streamed again.

Here, on his musing mood the goddess press’d,
Approaching soft, and thus the chief address’d:
“Unhappy man! to wasting woes a prey,
No more in sorrows languish life away:
Free as the winds I give thee now to rove:
Go, fell the timber of yon lofty grove,
And form a raft, and build the rising ship,
Sublime to bear thee o’er the gloomy deep.
To store the vessel let the care be mine,
With water from the rock and rosy wine,
And life-sustaining bread, and fair array,
And prosperous gales to waft thee on the way.
These, if the gods with my desire comply
(The gods, alas, more mighty far than I,
And better skill’d in dark events to come),
In peace shall land thee at thy native home.”

With sighs Ulysses heard the words she spoke,
Then thus his melancholy silence broke:
“Some other motive, goddess! sways thy mind
(Some close design, or turn of womankind),
Nor my return the end, nor this the way,
On a slight raft to pass the swelling sea,
Huge, horrid, vast! where scarce in safety sails
The best-built ship, though Jove inspires the gales.
The bold proposal how shall I fulfil,
Dark as I am, unconscious of thy will?
Swear, then, thou mean’st not what my soul forebodes;
Swear by the solemn oath that binds the gods.”

Him, while he spoke, with smiles Calypso eyed,
And gently grasp’d his hand, and thus replied:
“This shows thee, friend, by old experience taught,
And learn’d in all the wiles of human thought,
How prone to doubt, how cautious, are the wise!
But hear, O earth, and hear, ye sacred skies!
And thou, O Styx! whose formidable floods
Glide through the shades, and bind the attesting gods!
No form’d design, no meditated end,
Lurks in the counsel of thy faithful friend;
Kind the persuasion, and sincere my aim;
The same my practice, were my fate the same.
Heaven has not cursed me with a heart of steel,
But given the sense to pity, and to feel.”

Thus having said, the goddess marched before:
He trod her footsteps in the sandy shore.
At the cool cave arrived, they took their state;
He filled the throne where Mercury had sate.
For him the nymph a rich repast ordains,
Such as the mortal life of man sustains;
Before herself were placed the the cates divine,
Ambrosial banquet and celestial wine.
Their hunger satiate, and their thirst repress’d,
Thus spoke Calypso to her godlike guest:

“Ulysses! (with a sigh she thus began;)
O sprung from gods! in wisdom more than man!
Is then thy home the passion of thy heart?
Thus wilt thou leave me, are we thus to part?
Farewell! and ever joyful mayst thou be,
Nor break the transport with one thought of me.
But ah, Ulysses! wert thou given to know
What Fate yet dooms these still to undergo,
Thy heart might settle in this scene of ease.
And e’en these slighted charms might learn to please.
A willing goddess, and immortal life,
Might banish from thy mind an absent wife.
Am I inferior to a mortal dame?
Less soft my feature less august my frame?
Or shall the daughters of mankind compare
Their earth born beauties with the heavenly fair?”

“Alas! for this (the prudent man replies)
Against Ulysses shall thy anger rise?
Loved and adored, O goddess as thou art,
Forgive the weakness of a human heart.
Though well I see thy graces far above
The dear, though mortal, object of my love,
Of youth eternal well the difference know,
And the short date of fading charms below;
Yet every day, while absent thus I roam,
I languish to return and die at home.
Whate’er the gods shall destine me to bear;
In the black ocean or the watery war,
’Tis mine to master with a constant mind;
Inured to perils, to the worst resign’d,
By seas, by wars, so many dangers run;
Still I can suffer; their high will he done!”

Thus while he spoke, the beamy sun descends,
And rising night her friendly shade extends,
To the close grot the lonely pair remove,
And slept delighted with the gifts of love.
When rosy morning call’d them from their rest,
Ulysses robed him in the cloak and vest.
The nymph’s fair head a veil transparent graced,
Her swelling loins a radiant zone embraced
With flowers of gold; an under robe, unbound,
In snowy waves flow’d glittering on the ground.
Forth issuing thus, she gave him first to wield
A weighty axe with truest temper steeled,
And double-edged; the handle smooth and plain,
Wrought of the clouded olive’s easy grain;
And next, a wedge to drive with sweepy sway
Then to the neighboring forest led the way.
On the lone island’s utmost verge there stood
Of poplars, pine, and firs, a lofty wood,
Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
Scorch’d by the sun, or seared by heavenly fire
(Already dried). These pointing out to view,
The nymph just show’d him, and with tears withdrew.

Now toils the hero: trees on trees o’erthrown
Fall crackling round him, and the forests groan:
Sudden, full twenty on the plain are strow’d,
And lopp’d and lighten’d of their branchy load.
At equal angles these disposed to join,
He smooth’d and squared them by the rule and line,
(The wimbles for the work Calypso found)
With those he pierced them and with clinchers bound.
Long and capacious as a shipwright forms
Some bark’s broad bottom to out-ride the storms,
So large he built the raft; then ribb’d it strong
From space to space, and nail’d the planks along;
These form’d the sides: the deck he fashion’d last;
Then o’er the vessel raised the taper mast,
With crossing sail-yards dancing in the wind;
And to the helm the guiding rudder join’d
(With yielding osiers fenced, to break the force
Of surging waves, and steer the steady course).
Thy loom, Calypso, for the future sails
Supplied the cloth, capacious of the gales.
With stays and cordage last he rigged the ship,
And, roll’d on levers, launch’d her in the deep.

Four days were pass’d, and now the work complete,
Shone the fifth morn, when from her sacred seat
The nymph dismiss’d him (odorous garments given),
And bathed in fragrant oils that breathed of heaven:
Then fill’d two goatskins with her hands divine,
With water one, and one with sable wine:
Of every kind, provisions heaved aboard;
And the full decks with copious viands stored.
The goddess, last, a gentle breeze supplies,
To curl old Ocean, and to warm the skies.

And now, rejoicing in the prosperous gales,
With beating heart Ulysses spreads his sails;
Placed at the helm he sate, and mark’d the skies,
Nor closed in sleep his ever-watchful eyes.
There view’d the Pleiads, and the Northern Team,
And great Orion’s more refulgent beam.
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye:
Who shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.
Far on the left those radiant fires to keep
The nymph directed, as he sail’d the deep.
Full seventeen nights he cut the foaming way:
The distant land appear’d the following day:
Then swell’d to sight Phæacia’s dusky coast,
And woody mountains, half in vapours lost;
That lay before him indistinct and vast,
Like a broad shield amid the watery waste.

But him, thus voyaging the deeps below,
From far, on Solyme’s aërial brow,
The king of ocean saw, and seeing burn’d
(From Æthiopia’s happy climes return’d);
The raging monarch shook his azure head,
And thus in secret to his soul he said:
“Heavens! how uncertain are the powers on high!
Is then reversed the sentence of the sky,
In one man’s favour; while a distant guest
I shared secure the Æthiopian feast?
Behold how near Phæacia’s land he draws;
The land affix’d by Fate’s eternal laws
To end his toils. Is then our anger vain?
No; if this sceptre yet commands the main.”

He spoke, and high the forky trident hurl’d,
Rolls clouds on clouds, and stirs the watery world,
At once the face of earth and sea deforms,
Swells all the winds, and rouses all the storms.
Down rushed the night: east, west, together roar;
And south and north roll mountains to the shore.
Then shook the hero, to despair resign’d,
And question’d thus his yet unconquer’d mind;

“Wretch that I am! what farther fates attend
This life of toils, and what my destined end?
Too well, alas! the island goddess knew
On the black sea what perils should ensue.
New horrors now this destined head inclose;
Untill’d is yet the measure of my woes;
With what a cloud the brows of heaven are crown’d;
What raging winds! what roaring waters round!
’Tis Jove himself the swelling tempest rears;
Death, present death, on every side appears.
Happy! thrice happy! who, in battle slain,
Press’d in Atrides’ cause the Trojan plain!
Oh! had I died before that well-fought wall!
Had some distinguish’d day renown’d my fall
(Such as was that when showers of javelins fled
From conquering Troy around Achilles dead),
All Greece had paid me solemn funerals then,
And spread my glory with the sons of men.
A shameful fate now hides my hapless head,
Unwept, unnoted, and for ever dead!”

A mighty wave rush’d o’er him as he spoke,
The raft is cover’d, and the mast is broke;
Swept from the deck and from the rudder torn,
Far on the swelling surge the chief was borne;
While by the howling tempest rent in twain
Flew sail and sail-yards rattling o’er the main.
Long-press’d, he heaved beneath the weighty wave,
Clogg’d by the cumbrous vest Calypso gave;
At length, emerging, from his nostrils wide
And gushing mouth effused the briny tide;
E’en then not mindless of his last retreat,
He seized the raft, and leap’d into his seat,
Strong with the fear of death. In rolling flood,
Now here, now there, impell’d the floating wood
As when a heap of gather’d thorns is cast,
Now to, now fro, before the autumnal blast;
Together clung, it rolls around the field;
So roll’d the float, and so its texture held:
And now the south, and now the north, bear sway,
And now the east the foamy floods obey,
And now the west wind whirls it o’er the sea.
The wandering chief with toils on toils oppress’d,
Leucothea saw, and pity touch’d her breast.
(Herself a mortal once, of Cadmus’ strain,
But now an azure sister of the main)
Swift as a sea-mew springing from the flood,
All radiant on the raft the goddess stood;
Then thus address’d him: “Thou whom heaven decrees
To Neptune’s wrath, stern tyrant of the seas!
(Unequal contest!) not his rage and power,
Great as he is, such virtue shall devour.
What I suggest, thy wisdom will perform:
Forsake thy float, and leave it to the storm;
Strip off thy garments; Neptune’s fury brave
With naked strength, and plunge into the wave.
To reach Phæacia all thy nerves extend,
There Fate decrees thy miseries shall end.
This heavenly scarf beneath thy bosom bind,
And live; give all thy terrors to the wind.
Soon as thy arms the happy shore shall gain,
Return the gift, and cast it in the main:
Observe my orders, and with heed obey,
Cast it far off, and turn thy eyes away.”

With that, her hand the sacred veil bestows,
Then down the deeps she dived from whence she rose;
A moment snatch’d the shining form away,
And all was covered with the curling sea.

Struck with amaze, yet still to doubt inclined,
He stands suspended, and explores his mind:
“What shall I do? unhappy me! who knows
But other gods intend me other woes?
Whoe’er thou art, I shall not blindly join
Thy pleaded reason, but consult with mine:
For scarce in ken appears that distant isle
Thy voice foretells me shall conclude my toil.
Thus then I judge: while yet the planks sustain
The wild waves’ fury, here I fix’d remain:
But, when their texture to the tempest yields,
I launch adventurous on the liquid fields,
Join to the help of gods the strength of man,
And take this method, since the best I can.”

While thus his thoughts an anxious council hold,
The raging god a watery mountain roll’d;
Like a black sheet the whelming billows spread,
Burst o’er the float, and thunder’d on his head.
Planks, beams, disparted fly; the scatter’d wood
Rolls diverse, and in fragments strews the flood.
So the rude Boreas, o’er the field new-shorn,
Tosses and drives the scatter’d heaps of corn.
And now a single beam the chief bestrides:
There poised a while above the bounding tides,
His limbs discumbers of the clinging vest,
And binds the sacred cincture round his breast:
Then prone an ocean in a moment flung,
Stretch’d wide his eager arms, and shot the seas along.
All naked now, on heaving billows laid,
Stern Neptune eyed him, and contemptuous said:

“Go, learn’d in woes, and other foes essay!
Go, wander helpless on the watery way;
Thus, thus find out the destined shore, and then
(If Jove ordains it) mix with happier men.
Whate’er thy fate, the ills our wrath could raise
Shall last remember’d in thy best of days.”

This said, his sea-green steeds divide the foam,
And reach high Ægæ and the towery dome.
Now, scarce withdrawn the fierce earth-shaking power,
Jove’s daughter Pallas watch’d the favouring hour.
Back to their caves she bade the winds to fly;
And hush’d the blustering brethren of the sky.
The drier blasts alone of Boreas away,
And bear him soft on broken waves away;
With gentle force impelling to that shore,
Where fate has destined he shall toil no more.
And now, two nights, and now two days were pass’d,
Since wide he wander’d on the watery waste;
Heaved on the surge with intermitting breath,
And hourly panting in the arms of death.
The third fair morn now blazed upon the main;
Then glassy smooth lay all the liquid plain;
The winds were hush’d, the billows scarcely curl’d,
And a dead silence still’d the watery world;
When lifted on a ridgy wave he spies
The land at distance, and with sharpen’d eyes.
As pious children joy with vast delight
When a loved sire revives before their sight
(Who, lingering long, has call’d on death in vain,
Fix’d by some demon to his bed of pain,
Till heaven by miracle his life restore);
So joys Ulysses at the appearing shore;
And sees (and labours onward as he sees)
The rising forests, and the tufted trees.
And now, as near approaching as the sound
Of human voice the listening ear may wound,
Amidst the rocks he heard a hollow roar
Of murmuring surges breaking on the shore;
Nor peaceful port was there, nor winding bay,
To shield the vessel from the rolling sea,
But cliffs and shaggy shores, a dreadful sight!
All rough with rocks, with foamy billows white.
Fear seized his slacken’d limbs and beating heart,
As thus he communed with his soul apart;

“Ah me! when, o’er a length of waters toss’d,
These eyes at last behold the unhoped-for coast,
No port receives me from the angry main,
But the loud deeps demand me back again.
Above, sharp rocks forbid access; around
Roar the wild waves; beneath, is sea profound!
No footing sure affords the faithless sand,
To stem too rapid, and too deep to stand.
If here I enter, my efforts are vain,
Dash’d on the cliffs, or heaved into the main;
Or round the island if my course I bend,
Where the ports open, or the shores descend,
Back to the seas the rolling surge may sweep,
And bury all my hopes beneath the deep.
Or some enormous whale the god may send
(For many such an Amphitrite attend);
Too well the turns of mortal chance I know,
And hate relentless of my heavenly foe.”
While thus he thought, a monstrous wave upbore
The chief, and dash’d him on the craggy shore;
Torn was his skin, nor had the ribs been whole,
But Instant Pallas enter’d in his soul.
Close to the cliff with both his hands he clung,
And stuck adherent, and suspended hung;
Till the huge surge roll’d off; then backward sweep
The refluent tides, and plunge him in the deep.
As when the polypus, from forth his cave
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are stuck with stones and sands;
So the rough rock had shagg’d Ulysses hands,
And now had perish’d, whelm’d beneath the main,
The unhappy man; e’en fate had been in vain;
But all-subduing Pallas lent her power,
And prudence saved him in the needful hour.
Beyond the beating surge his course he bore,
(A wider circle, but in sight of shore),
With longing eyes, observing, to survey
Some smooth ascent, or safe sequester’d bay.
Between the parting rocks at length he spied
A failing stream with gentler waters glide;
Where to the seas the shelving shore declined,
And form’d a bay impervious to the wind.
To this calm port the glad Ulysses press’d,
And hail’d the river, and its god address’d:

“Whoe’er thou art, before whose stream unknown
I bend, a suppliant at thy watery throne,
Hear, azure king! nor let me fly in vain
To thee from Neptune and the raging main
Heaven hears and pities hapless men like me,
For sacred even to gods is misery:
Let then thy waters give the weary rest,
And save a suppliant, and a man distress’d.”

He pray’d, and straight the gentle stream subsides,
Detains the rushing current of his tides,
Before the wanderer smooths the watery way,
And soft receives him from the rolling sea.
That moment, fainting as he touch’d the shore,
He dropp’d his sinewy arms: his knees no more
Perform’d their office, or his weight upheld:
His swoln heart heaved; his bloated body swell’d:
From mouth and nose the briny torrent ran;
And lost in lassitude lay all the man,
Deprived of voice, of motion, and of breath;
The soul scarce waking in the arms of death.
Soon as warm life its wonted office found,
The mindful chief Leucothea’s scarf unbound;
Observant of her word, he turn’d aside
His head, and cast it on the rolling tide.
Behind him far, upon the purple waves,
The waters waft it, and the nymph receives.

Now parting from the stream, Ulysses found
A mossy bank with pliant rushes crown’d;
The bank he press’d, and gently kiss’d the ground;
Where on the flowery herb as soft he lay,
Thus to his soul the sage began to say:

“What will ye next ordain, ye powers on high!
And yet, ah yet, what fates are we to try?
Here by the stream, if I the night out-wear,
Thus spent already, how shall nature bear
The dews descending, and nocturnal air;
Or chilly vapours breathing from the flood
When morning rises?—If I take the wood,
And in thick shelter of innumerous boughs
Enjoy the comfort gentle sleep allows;
Though fenced from cold, and though my toil be pass’d,
What savage beasts may wander in the waste?
Perhaps I yet may fall a bloody prey
To prowling bears, or lions in the way.”

Thus long debating in himself he stood:
At length he took the passage to the wood,
Whose shady horrors on a rising brow
Waved high, and frown’d upon the stream below.
There grew two olives, closest of the grove,
With roots entwined, the branches interwove;
Alike their leaves, but not alike they smiled
With sister-fruits; one fertile, one was wild.
Nor here the sun’s meridian rays had power,
Nor wind sharp-piercing, nor the rushing shower;
The verdant arch so close its texture kept:
Beneath this covert great Ulysses crept.
Of gather’d leaves an ample bed he made
(Thick strewn by tempest through the bowery shade);
Where three at least might winter’s cold defy,
Though Boreas raged along the inclement sky.
This store with joy the patient hero found,
And, sunk amidst them, heap’d the leaves around.
As some poor peasant, fated to reside
Remote from neighbours in a forest wide,
Studious to save what human wants require,
In embers heap’d, preserves the seeds of fire:
Hid in dry foliage thus Ulysses lies,
Till Pallas pour’d soft slumbers on his eyes;
And golden dreams (the gift of sweet repose)
Lull’d all his cares, and banish’d all his woes.




BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.


Pallas appearing in a dream in to Nausicaa (the daughter of Alcinous,
king of Phæacia, commands her to descend to the river, and wash the
robes of state, in preparation for her nuptials. Nausicaa goes with her
handmaidens to the river; where, while the garments are spread on the
bank, they divert themselves in sports. Their voices awaken Ulysses,
who, addressing himself to the princess, is by her relieved and
clothed, and receives directions in what manner to apply to the king
and queen of the island.


While thus the weary wanderer sunk to rest,
And peaceful slumbers calmed his anxious breast,
The martial maid from heaven’s aërial height
Swift to Phæacia wing’d her rapid flight.
In elder times the soft Phæacian train
In ease possess’d the wide Hyperian plain;
Till the Cyclopean race in arms arose,
A lawless nation of gigantic foes;
Then great Nausithous from Hyperia far,
Through seas retreating from the sounds of war,
The recreant nation to fair Scheria led,
Where never science rear’d her laurell’d head;
There round his tribes a strength of wall he raised;
To heaven the glittering domes and temples blazed;
Just to his realms, he parted grounds from grounds,
And shared the lands, and gave the lands their bounds.
Now in the silent grave the monarch lay,
And wise Alcinous held the legal sway.

To his high palace through the fields of air
The goddess shot; Ulysses was her care.
There, as the night in silence roll’d away,
A heaven of charms divine Nausicaa lay:
Through the thick gloom the shining portals blaze;
Two nymphs the portals guard, each nymph a Grace,
Light as the viewless air the warrior maid
Glides through the valves, and hovers round her head;
A favourite virgin’s blooming form she took,
From Dymas sprung, and thus the vision spoke:

“Oh Indolent! to waste thy hours away!
And sleep’st thou careless of the bridal day!
Thy spousal ornament neglected lies;
Arise, prepare the bridal train, arise!
A just applause the cares of dress impart,
And give soft transport to a parent’s heart.
Haste, to the limpid stream direct thy way,
When the gay morn unveils her smiling ray;
Haste to the stream! companion of thy care,
Lo, I thy steps attend, thy labours share.
Virgin, awake! the marriage hour is nigh,
See from their thrones thy kindred monarchs sigh!
The royal car at early dawn obtain,
And order mules obedient to the rein;
For rough the way, and distant rolls the wave,
Where their fair vests Phæacian virgins lave,
In pomp ride forth; for pomp becomes the great
And majesty derives a grace from state.”
Then to the palaces of heaven she sails,
Incumbent on the wings of wafting gales;
The seat of gods; the regions mild of peace,
Full joy, and calm eternity of ease.
There no rude winds presume to shake the skies,
No rains descend, no snowy vapours rise;
But on immortal thrones the blest repose;
The firmament with living splendours glows.
Hither the goddess winged the aërial way,
Through heaven’s eternal gates that blazed with day.

Now from her rosy car Aurora shed
The dawn, and all the orient flamed with red.
Up rose the virgin with the morning light,
Obedient to the vision of the night.
The queen she sought, the queen her hours bestowed
In curious works; the whirling spindle glow’d
With crimson threads, while busy damsels call
The snowy fleece, or twist the purpled wool.
Meanwhile Phæacia’s peers in council sate;
From his high dome the king descends in state;
Then with a filial awe the royal maid
Approach’d him passing, and submissive said:

“Will my dread sire his ear regardful deign,
And may his child the royal car obtain?
Say, with my garments shall I bend my way?
Where through the vales the mazy waters stray?
A dignity of dress adorns the great,
And kings draw lustre from the robe of state.
Five sons thou hast; three wait the bridal day.
And spotless robes become the young and gay;
So when with praise amid the dance they shine,
By these my cares adorn’d that praise is mine.”

Thus she: but blushes ill-restrain’d betray
Her thoughts intentive on the bridal day,
The conscious sire the dawning blush survey’d,
And, smiling, thus bespoke the blooming maid
“My child, my darling joy, the car receive;
That, and whate’er our daughter asks, we give.”
Swift at the royal nod the attending train
The car prepare, the mules incessant rein,
The blooming virgin with despatchful cares
Tunics, and stoles, and robes imperial, bears.
The queen, assiduous to her train assigns
The sumptuous viands, and the flavorous wines.
The train prepare a cruse of curious mould,
A cruse of fragrance, form’d of burnish’d gold;
Odour divine! whose soft refreshing streams
Sleek the smooth skin, and scent the snowy limbs.

Now mounting the gay seat, the silken reins
Shine in her hand; along the sounding plains
Swift fly the mules; nor rode the nymph alone;
Around, a bevy of bright damsels shone.
They seek the cisterns where Phæacian dames
Wash their fair garments in the limpid streams;
Where, gathering into depth from falling rills,
The lucid wave a spacious bason fills.
The mules, unharness’d, range beside the main,
Or crop the verdant herbage of the plain.

Then emulous the royal robes they lave,
And plunge the vestures in the cleansing wave
(The vestures cleansed o’erspread the shelly sand,
Their snowy lustre whitens all the strand);
Then with a short repast relieve their toil,
And o’er their limbs diffuse ambrosial oil;
And while the robes imbibe the solar ray,
O’er the green mead the sporting virgins play
(Their shining veils unbound). Along the skies,
Toss’d and retoss’d, the ball incessant flies.
They sport, they feast; Nausicaa lifts her voice,
And, warbling sweet, makes earth and heaven rejoice.

As when o’er Erymanth Diana roves,
Or wide Täygetus’ resounding groves;
A sylvan train the huntress queen surrounds,
Her rattling quiver from her shoulders sounds:
Fierce in the sport, along the mountain’s brow
They bay the boar, or chase the bounding roe;
High o’er the lawn, with more majestic pace,
Above the nymphs she treads with stately grace;
Distinguish’d excellence the goddess proves;
Exults Latona as the virgin moves.
With equal grace Nausicaa trod the plain,
And shone transcendent o’er the beauteous train.

Meantime (the care and favourite of the skies
Wrapp’d in imbowering shade, Ulysses lies,
His woes forgot! but Pallas now address’d
To break the bands of all-composing rest.
Forth from her snowy hand Nausicaa threw
The various ball; the ball erroneous flew
And swam the stream; loud shrieks the virgin train,
And the loud shriek redoubles from the main.
Waked by the shrilling sound, Ulysses rose,
And, to the deaf woods wailing, breathed his woes:

“Ah me! on what inhospitable coast,
On what new region is Ulysses toss’d;
Possess’d by wild barbarians fierce in arms;
Or men, whose bosom tender pity warms?
What sounds are these that gather from he shores?
The voice of nymphs that haunt the sylvan bowers,
The fair-hair’d Dryads of the shady wood;
Or azure daughters of the silver flood;
Or human voice? but issuing from the shades,
Why cease I straight to learn what sound invades?”

Then, where the grove with leaves umbrageous bends,
With forceful strength a branch the hero rends;
Around his loins the verdant cincture spreads
A wreathy foliage and concealing shades.
As when a lion in the midnight hours,
Beat by rude blasts, and wet with wintry showers,
Descends terrific from the mountains brow;
With living flames his rolling eye balls glow;
With conscious strength elate, he bends his way,
Majestically fierce, to seize his prey
(The steer or stag;) or, with keen hunger bold,
Spring o’er the fence and dissipates the fold.
No less a terror, from the neighbouring groves
(Rough from the tossing surge) Ulysses moves;
Urged on by want, and recent from the storms;
The brackish ooze his manly grace deforms.
Wide o’er the shore with many a piercing cry
To rocks, to caves, the frightened virgins fly;
All but the nymph; the nymph stood fix’d alone,
By Pallas arm’d with boldness not her own.
Meantime in dubious thought the king awaits,
And, self-considering, as he stands, debates;
Distant his mournful story to declare,
Or prostrate at her knee address the prayer.
But fearful to offend, by wisdom sway’d,
At awful distance he accosts the maid:

“If from the skies a goddess, or if earth
(Imperial virgin) boast thy glorious birth,
To thee I bend! If in that bright disguise
Thou visit earth, a daughter of the skies,
Hail, Dian, hail! the huntress of the groves
So shines majestic, and so stately moves,
So breathes an air divine! But if thy race
Be mortal, and this earth thy native place,
Blest is the father from whose loins you sprung,
Blest is the mother at whose breast you hung.
Blest are the brethren who thy blood divide,
To such a miracle of charms allied:
Joyful they see applauding princes gaze,
When stately in the dance you swim the harmonious maze.
But blest o’er all, the youth with heavenly charms,
Who clasps the bright perfection in his arms!
Never, I never view’d till this blest hour
Such finish’d grace! I gaze, and I adore!
Thus seems the palm with stately honours crown’d
By Phœbus’ altars; thus o’erlooks the ground;
The pride of Delos. (By the Delian coast,
I voyaged, leader of a warrior-host,
But ah, how changed! from thence my sorrow flows;
O fatal voyage, source of all my woes;)
Raptured I stood, and as this hour amazed,
With reverence at the lofty wonder gazed:
Raptured I stand! for earth ne’er knew to bear
A plant so stately, or a nymph so fair.
Awed from access, I lift my suppliant hands;
For Misery, O queen! before thee stands.
Twice ten tempestuous nights I roll’d, resign’d
To roaring billows, and the warring wind;
Heaven bade the deep to spare; but heaven, my foe,
Spares only to inflict some mightier woe.
Inured to cares, to death in all its forms;
Outcast I rove, familiar with the storms.
Once more I view the face of human kind:
Oh let soft pity touch thy generous mind!
Unconscious of what air I breathe, I stand
Naked, defenceless on a narrow land.
Propitious to my wants a vest supply
To guard the wretched from the inclement sky:
So may the gods, who heaven and earth control,
Crown the chaste wishes of thy virtuous soul,
On thy soft hours their choicest blessings shed;
Blest with a husband be thy bridal bed;
Blest be thy husband with a blooming race,
And lasting union crown your blissful days.
The gods, when they supremely bless, bestow
Firm union on their favourites below;
Then envy grieves, with inly-pining hate;
The good exult, and heaven is in our state.”

To whom the nymph: “O stranger, cease thy care;
Wise is thy soul, but man is born to bear;
Jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious scales,
And the good suffers, while the bad prevails.
Bear, with a soul resign’d, the will of Jove;
Who breathes, must mourn: thy woes are from above.
But since thou tread’st our hospitable shore,
’Tis mine to bid the wretched grieve no more,
To clothe the naked, and thy way to guide.
Know, the Phæacian tribes this land divide;
From great Alcinous’ royal loins I spring,
A happy nation, and a happy king.”

Then to her maids: “Why, why, ye coward train,
These fears, this flight? ye fear, and fly in vain.
Dread ye a foe? dismiss that idle dread,
’Tis death with hostile step these shores to tread;
Safe in the love of heaven, an ocean flows
Around our realm, a barrier from the foes;
’Tis ours this son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheer the sad heart, nor let affliction grieve.
By Jove the stranger and the poor are sent;
And what to those we give to Jove is lent.
Then food supply, and bathe his fainting limbs
Where waving shades obscure the mazy streams.”

Obedient to the call, the chief they guide
To the calm current of the secret tide;
Close by the stream a royal dress they lay,
A vest and robe, with rich embroidery gay;
Then unguents in a vase of gold supply,
That breathed a fragrance through the balmy sky.

To them the king: “No longer I detain
Your friendly care: retire, ye virgin train!
Retire, while from my wearied limbs I lave
The foul pollution of the briny wave.
Ye gods! since this worn frame refection knew,
What scenes have I surveyed of dreadful view!
But, nymphs, recede! sage chastity denies
To raise the blush, or pain the modest eyes.”

The nymphs withdrawn, at once into the tide
Active he bounds; the flashing waves divide
O’er all his limbs his hands the waves diffuse,
And from his locks compress the weedy ooze;
The balmy oil, a fragrant shower, be sheds;
Then, dressed, in pomp magnificently treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and air divine:
Back from his brows a length of hair unfurls,
His hyacinthine locks descend in wavy curls.
As by some artist, to whom Vulcan gives
His skill divine, a breathing statue lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And o’er the silver pours the fusile gold
So Pallas his heroic frame improves
With heavenly bloom, and like a god he moves.
A fragrance breathes around; majestic grace
Attends his steps: the astonished virgins gaze.
Soft he reclines along the murmuring seas,
Inhaling freshness from the fanning breeze.

The wondering nymph his glorious port survey’d,
And to her damsels, with amazement, said:

“Not without care divine the stranger treads
This land of joy; his steps some godhead leads:
Would Jove destroy him, sure he had been driven
Far from this realm, the favourite isle of heaven.
Late, a sad spectacle of woe, he trod
The desert sands, and now he looks a god.
Oh heaven! in my connubial hour decree
This man my spouse, or such a spouse as he!
But haste, the viands and the bowl provide.”
The maids the viands and the bowl supplied:
Eager he fed, for keen his hunger raged,
And with the generous vintage thirst assuaged.

Now on return her care Nausicaa bends,
The robes resumes, the glittering car ascends,
Far blooming o’er the field; and as she press’d
The splendid seat, the listening chief address’d:

“Stranger, arise! the sun rolls down the day.
Lo, to the palace I direct thy way;
Where, in high state, the nobles of the land
Attend my royal sire, a radiant band
But hear, though wisdom in thy soul presides,
Speaks from thy tongue, and every action guides;
Advance at distance, while I pass the plain
Where o’er the furrows waves the golden grain;
Alone I reascend—With airy mounds
A strength of wall the guarded city bounds;
The jutting land two ample bays divides:
Full through the narrow mouths descend the tides;
The spacious basons arching rocks enclose,
A sure defence from every storm that blows.
Close to the bay great Neptune’s fane adjoins;
And near, a forum flank’d with marble shines,
Where the bold youth, the numerous fleets to store,
Shape the broad sail, or smooth the taper oar:
For not the bow they bend, nor boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill;
But the tall mast above the vessel rear,
Or teach the fluttering sail to float in air.
They rush into the deep with eager joy,
Climb the steep surge, and through the tempest fly;
A proud, unpolish’d race—To me belongs
The care to shun the blast of slanderous tongues;
Lest malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
Thus with wild censure taint my spotless name:
‘What stranger this whom thus Nausicaa leads!
Heavens, with what graceful majesty he treads!
Perhaps a native of some distant shore,
The future consort of her bridal hour:
Or rather some descendant of the skies;
Won by her prayer, the aërial bridegroom flies,
Heaven on that hour its choicest influence shed,
That gave a foreign spouse to crown her bed!
All, all the godlike worthies that adorn
This realm, she flies: Phæacia is her scorn.’
And just the blame: for female innocence
Not only flies the guilt, but shuns the offence:
The unguarded virgin, as unchaste, I blame;
And the least freedom with the sex is shame,
Till our consenting sires a spouse provide,
And public nuptials justify the bride,
But would’st thou soon review thy native plain?
Attend, and speedy thou shalt pass the main:
Nigh where a grove with verdant poplars crown’d,
To Pallas sacred, shades the holy ground,
We bend our way; a bubbling fount distills
A lucid lake, and thence descends in rills;
Around the grove, a mead with lively green
Falls by degrees, and forms a beauteous scene;
Here a rich juice the royal vineyard pours;
And there the garden yields a waste of flowers.
Hence lies the town, as far as to the ear
Floats a strong shout along the waves of air.
There wait embower’d, while I ascend alone
To great Alcinous on his royal throne.
Arrived, advance, impatient of delay,
And to the lofty palace bend thy way:
The lofty palace overlooks the town,
From every dome by pomp superior known;
A child may point the way. With earnest gait
Seek thou the queen along the rooms of state;
Her royal hand a wondrous work designs,
Around a circle of bright damsels shines;
Part twist the threads, and part the wool dispose,
While with the purple orb the spindle glows.
High on a throne, amid the Scherian powers,
My royal father shares the genial hours:
But to the queen thy mournful tale disclose,
With the prevailing eloquence of woes:
So shalt thou view with joy thy natal shore,
Though mountains rise between and oceans roar.”

She added not, but waving, as she wheel’d,
The silver scourge, it glitter’d o’er the field;
With skill the virgin guides the embroider’d rein,
Slow rolls the car before the attending train,
Now whirling down the heavens, the golden day
Shot through the western clouds a dewy ray;
The grove they reach, where, from the sacred shade,
To Pallas thus the pensive hero pray’d:

“Daughter of Jove! whose arms in thunder wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield;
Forsook by thee, in vain I sought thy aid
When booming billows closed above my bead;
Attend, unconquer’d maid! accord my vows,
Bid the Great hear, and pitying, heal my woes.”

This heard Minerva, but forbore to fly
(By Neptune awed) apparent from the sky;
Stern god! who raged with vengeance, unrestrain’d.
Till great Ulysses hail’d his native land.




BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT.
THE COURT OF ALCINOUS.


The princess Nausicaa returns to the city and Ulysses soon after
follows thither. He is met by Pallas in the form of a young virgin, who
guides him to the palace, and directs him in what manner to address the
queen Arete. She then involves him in a mist which causes him to pass
invisible. The palace and gardens of Alcinous described. Ulysses
falling at the feet of the queen, the mist disperses, the Phæacians
admire, and receive him with respect. The queen inquiring by what means
he had the garments he then wore, be relates to her and Alcinous his
departure from Calypso, and his arrival in their dominions.
    The same day continues, and the book ends with the night.


The patient heavenly man thus suppliant pray’d;
While the slow mules draws on the imperial maid;
Through the proud street she moves, the public gaze;
The turning wheel before the palace stays.
With ready love her brothers, gathering round,
Received the vestures, and the mules unbound.
She seeks the bridal bower: a matron there
The rising fire supplies with busy care,
Whose charms in youth her father’s heart inflamed,
Now worn with age, Eurymedusa named;
The captive dame Phæacian rovers bore,
Snatch’d from Epirus, her sweet native shore
(A grateful prize), and in her bloom bestow’d
On good Alcinous, honor’d as a god;
Nurse of Nausicaa from her infant years,
And tender second to a mother’s cares.

Now from the sacred thicket where he lay,
To town Ulysses took the winding way.
Propitious Pallas, to secure her care,
Around him spread a veil of thicken’d air;
To shun the encounter of the vulgar crowd,
Insulting still, inquisitive and loud.
When near the famed Phæacian walls he drew,
The beauteous city opening to his view,
His step a virgin met, and stood before:
A polish’d urn the seeming virgin bore,
And youthful smiled; but in the low disguise
Lay hid the goddess with the azure eyes.

“Show me, fair daughter (thus the chief demands),
The house of him who rules these happy lands
Through many woes and wanderings, do I come
To good Alcinous’ hospitable dome.
Far from my native coast, I rove alone,
A wretched stranger, and of all unknown!”

The goddess answer’d: “Father, I obey,
And point the wandering traveller his way:
Well known to me the palace you inquire,
For fast beside it dwells my honour’d sire:
But silent march, nor greet the common train
With question needless, or inquiry vain;
A race of ragged mariners are these,
Unpolish’d men, and boisterous as their seas
The native islanders alone their care,
And hateful he who breathes a foreign air.
These did the ruler of the deep ordain
To build proud navies, and command the main;
On canvas wings to cut the watery way;
No bird so light, no thought so swift as they.”

Thus having spoke, the unknown celestial leads:
The footsteps of the deity he treads,
And secret moves along the crowded space,
Unseen of all the rude Phæacian race.
(So Pallas order’d, Pallas to their eyes
The mist objected, and condensed the skies.)
The chief with wonder sees the extended streets,
The spreading harbours, and the riding fleets;
He next their princes’ lofty domes admires,
In separate islands, crown’d with rising spires;
And deep entrenchments, and high walls of stone.
That gird the city like a marble zone.
At length the kingly palace-gates he view’d;
There stopp’d the goddess, and her speech renew’d;

“My task is done: the mansion you inquire
Appears before you: enter, and admire.
High-throned, and feasting, there thou shalt behold
The sceptred rulers. Fear not, but be bold:
A decent boldness ever meets with friends,
Succeeds, and even a stranger recommends
First to the queen prefer a suppliant’s claim,
Alcinous’ queen, Arete is her name.
The same her parents, and her power the same.
For know, from ocean’s god Nausithous sprung,
And Peribæa, beautiful and young
(Eurymedon’s last hope, who ruled of old
The race of giants, impious, proud, and bold:
Perish’d the nation in unrighteous war,
Perish’d the prince, and left this only heir),
Who now, by Neptune’s amorous power compress’d,
Produced a monarch that his people bless’d,
Father and prince of the Phæacian name;
From him Rhexenor and Alcinous came.
The first by Phœbus’ hurtling arrows fired,
New from his nuptials, hapless youth! expired.
No son survived; Arete heir’d his state,
And her, Alcinous chose his royal mate.
With honours yet to womankind unknown.
This queen he graces, and divides the throne;
In equal tenderness her sons conspire,
And all the children emulate their sire.
When through the streets she gracious deigns to move
(The public wonder and the public love),
The tongues of all with transport sound her praise,
The eyes of all, as on a goddess, gaze.
She feels the triumph of a generous breast;
To heal divisions, to relieve the oppress’d;
In virtue rich; in blessing others, bless’d.
(to then secure, thy humble suit prefer
And owe thy country and thy friends to her.”

With that the goddess deign’d no longer stay,
But o’er the world of waters wing’d her way;
Forsaking Scheria’s ever-pleasing shore,
The winds to Marathon the virgin bore:
Thence, where proud Athens rears her towery head,
With opening streets and shining structures spread,
She pass’d, delighted with the well-known seats;
And to Erectheus’ sacred dome retreats.

Meanwhile Ulysses at the palace waits,
There stops, and anxious with his soul debates,
Fix’d in amaze before the royal gates.
The front appear’d with radiant splendours gay,
Bright as the lamp of night, or orb of day,
The walls were massy brass: the cornice high
Blue metals crown’d in colours of the sky,
Rich plates of gold the folding doors incase;
The pillars silver, on a brazen base;
Silver the lintels deep-projecting o’er,
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
Two rows of stately dogs, on either hand,
In sculptured gold and labour’d silver stood
These Vulcan form’d with art divine, to wait
Immortal guardians at Alcinous’ gate;
Alive each animated frame appears,
And still to live beyond the power of years,
Fair thrones within from space to space were raised,
Where various carpets with embroidery blessed,
The work of matrons: these the princes press’d,
Day following day, a long-continued feast.
Refulgent pedestals the walls surround,
Which boys of gold with flaming torches crown’d;
The polish’d ore, reflecting every ray,
Blazed on the banquets with a double day.
Full fifty handmaids form the household train;
Some turn the mill, or sift the golden grain;
Some ply the loom; their busy fingers move
Like poplar-leaves when Zephyr fans the grove.
Not more renown’d the men of Scheria’s isle
For sailing arts and all the naval toil,
Than works of female skill their women’s pride,
The flying shuttle through the threads to guide:
Pallas to these her double gifts imparts,
Incentive genius, and industrious arts.

Close to the gates a spacious garden lies,
From storms defended and inclement skies.
Four acres was the allotted space of ground,
Fenced with a green enclosure all around.
Tall thriving trees confess’d the fruitful mould:
The reddening apple ripens here to gold.
Here the blue fig with luscious juice o’erflows,
With deeper red the full pomegranate glows;
The branch here bends beneath the weighty pear,
And verdant olives flourish round the year,
The balmy spirit of the western gale
Eternal breathes on fruits, unthought to fail:
Each dropping pear a following pear supplies,
On apples apples, figs on figs arise:
The same mild season gives the blooms to blow,
The buds to harden, and the fruits to grow.

Here order’d vines in equal ranks appear,
With all the united labours of the year;
Some to unload the fertile branches run,
Some dry the blackening clusters in the sun,
Others to tread the liquid harvest join:
The groaning presses foam with floods of wine
Here are the vines in early flower descried,
Here grapes discolour’d on the sunnyside,
And there in autumn’s richest purple dyed,

Beds of all various herbs, for ever green,
In beauteous order terminate the scene.

Two plenteous fountains the whole prospect crown’d
This through the gardens leads its streams around
Visits each plant, and waters all the ground;
While that in pipes beneath the palace flows,
And thence its current on the town bestows:
To various use their various streams they bring,
The people one, and one supplies the king.

Such were the glories which the gods ordain’d,
To grace Alcinous, and his happy land.
E’en from the chief whom men and nations knew,
The unwonted scene surprise and rapture drew;
In pleasing thought he ran the prospect o’er,
Then hasty enter’d at the lofty door.
Night now approaching, in the palace stand,
With goblets crown’d, the rulers of the land;
Prepared for rest, and offering to the god
Who bears the virtue of the sleepy rod,
Unseen he glided through the joyous crowd,
With darkness circled, and an ambient cloud.
Direct to great Alcinous’ throne he came,
And prostrate fell before the imperial dame.
Then from around him dropp’d the veil of night;
Sudden he shines, and manifest to sight.
The nobles gaze, with awful fear oppress’d;
Silent they gaze, and eye the godlike guest.

“Daughter of great Rhexenor! (thus began,
Low at her knees, the much-enduring man)
To thee, thy consort, and this royal train,
To all that share the blessings of your reign,
A suppliant bends: oh pity human woe!
’Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe.
A wretched exile to his country send,
Long worn with griefs, and long without a friend
So may the gods your better days increase,
And all your joys descend on all your race;
So reign for ever on your country’s breast,
Your people blessing, by your people bless’d!”

Then to the genial hearth he bow’d his face,
And humbled in the ashes took his place.
Silence ensued. The eldest first began,
Echeneus sage, a venerable man!
Whose well-taught mind the present age surpass’d,
And join’d to that the experience of the last.
Fit words attended on his weighty sense,
And mild persuasion flow’d in eloquence.

“Oh sight (he cried) dishonest and unjust!
A guest, a stranger, seated in the dust!
To raise the lowly suppliant from the ground
Befits a monarch. Lo! the peers around
But wait thy word, the gentle guest to grace,
And seat him fair in some distinguish’d place.
Let first the herald due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way:
Then set the genial banquet in his view,
And give the stranger-guest a stranger’s due.”

His sage advice the listening king obeys,
He stretch’d his hand the prudent chief to raise,
And from his seat Laodamas removed
(The monarch’s offspring, and his best-beloved);
There next his side the godlike hero sate;
With stars of silver shone the bed of state.
The golden ewer a beauteous handmaid brings,
Replenish’d from the cool translucent springs,
Whose polish’d vase with copious streams supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
The table next in regal order spread,
The glittering canisters are heap’d with bread:
Viands of various kinds invite the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Thus feasting high, Alcinous gave the sign,
And bade the herald pour the rosy wine;
“Let all around the due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way.”

He said. Pontonous heard the king’s command;
The circling goblet moves from hand to hand;
Each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man.
Alcinous then, with aspect mild, began:

“Princes and peers, attend; while we impart
To you the thoughts of no inhuman heart.
Now pleased and satiate from the social rite
Repair we to the blessings of the night;
But with the rising day, assembled here,
Let all the elders of the land appear,
Pious observe our hospitable laws,
And Heaven propitiate in the stranger’s cause;
Then join’d in council, proper means explore
Safe to transport him to the wished-for shore
(How distant that, imports us not to know,
Nor weigh the labour, but relieve the woe).
Meantime, nor harm nor anguish let him bear
This interval, Heaven trusts him to our care
But to his native land our charge resign’d,
Heaven’s is his life to come, and all the woes behind.
Then must he suffer what the Fates ordain;
For Fate has wove the thread of life with pain!
And twins, e’en from the birth, are Misery and Man!
But if, descended from the Olympian bower,
Gracious approach us some immortal power;
If in that form thou comest a guest divine:
Some high event the conscious gods design.
As yet, unbid they never graced our feast,
The solemn sacrifice call’d down the guest;
Then manifest of Heaven the vision stood,
And to our eyes familiar was the god.
Oft with some favour’d traveller they stray,
And shine before him all the desert way;
With social intercourse, and face to face,
The friends and guardians of our pious race.
So near approach we their celestial kind,
By justice, truth, and probity of mind;
As our dire neighbours of Cyclopean birth
Match in fierce wrong the giant-sons of earth.”

“Let no such thought (with modest grace rejoin’d
The prudent Greek) possess the royal mind.
Alas! a mortal, like thyself, am I;
No glorious native of yon azure sky:
In form, ah how unlike their heavenly kind!
How more inferior in the gifts of mind!
Alas, a mortal! most oppress’d of those
Whom Fate has loaded with a weight of woes;
By a sad train of Miseries alone
Distinguish’d long, and second now to none!
By Heaven’s high will compell’d from shore to shore;
With Heaven’s high will prepared to suffer more.
What histories of toil could I declare!
But still long-wearied nature wants repair;
Spent with fatigue, and shrunk with pining fast,
My craving bowels still require repast.
Howe’er the noble, suffering mind may grieve
Its load of anguish, and disdain to live,
Necessity demands our daily bread;
Hunger is insolent, and will be fed.
But finish, oh ye peers! what you propose,
And let the morrow’s dawn conclude my woes.
Pleased will I suffer all the gods ordain,
To see my soil, my son, my friends again.
That view vouchsafed, let instant death surprise
With ever-during shade these happy eyes!”

The assembled peers with general praise approved
His pleaded reason, and the suit he moved.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs,
Ulysses in the regal walls alone
Remain’d: beside him, on a splendid throne,
Divine Arete and Alcinous shone.
The queen, on nearer view, the guest survey’d,
Rob’d in the garments her own hands had made,
Not without wonder seen. Then thus began,
Her words addressing to the godlike man:

“Camest thou hither, wondrous stranger! say,
From lands remote and o’er a length of sea?
Tell, then, whence art thou? whence, that princely air?
And robes like these, so recent and so fair?”

“Hard is the task, O princess! you impose
(Thus sighing spoke the man of many woes),
The long, the mournful series to relate
Of all my sorrows sent by Heaven and Fate!
Yet what you ask, attend. An island lies
Beyond these tracts, and under other skies,
Ogygia named, in Ocean’s watery arms;
Where dwells Calypso, dreadful in her charms!
Remote from gods or men she holds her reign,
Amid the terrors of a rolling main.
Me, only me, the hand of fortune bore,
Unblest! to tread that interdicted shore:
When Jove tremendous in the sable deeps
Launch’d his red lightning at our scattered ships;
Then, all my fleet and all my followers lost.
Sole on a plank on boiling surges toss’d,
Heaven drove my wreck the Ogygian Isle to find,
Full nine days floating to the wave and wind.
Met by the goddess there with open arms,
She bribed my stay with more than human charms;
Nay, promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe;
But all her blandishments successless prove,
To banish from my breast my country’s love.
I stay reluctant seven continued years,
And water her ambrosial couch with tears,
The eighth she voluntary moves to part,
Or urged by Jove, or her own changeful heart.
A raft was formed to cross the surging sea;
Herself supplied the stores and rich array,
And gave the gales to waft me on my way,
In seventeen days appear’d your pleasing coast,
And woody mountains half in vapours lost.
Joy touched my soul; my soul was joy’d in vain,
For angry Neptune roused the raging main;
The wild winds whistle, and the billows roar;
The splitting raft the furious tempest tore;
And storms vindictive intercept the shore.
Soon as their rage subsides, the seas I brave
With naked force, and shoot along the wave,
To reach this isle; but there my hopes were lost,
The surge impell’d me on a craggy coast.
I chose the safer sea, and chanced to find
A river’s mouth impervious to the wind,
And clear of rocks. I fainted by the flood;
Then took the shelter of the neighbouring wood.
’Twas night, and, covered in the foliage deep,
Jove plunged my senses in the death of sleep.
All night I slept, oblivious of my pain:
Aurora dawned and Phœbus shined in vain,
Nor, till oblique he sloped his evening ray,
Had Somnus dried the balmy dews away.
Then female voices from the shore I heard:
A maid amidst them, goddess-like appear’d;
To her I sued, she pitied my distress;
Like thee in beauty, nor in virtue less.
Who from such youth could hope considerate care?
In youth and beauty wisdom is but rare!
She gave me life, relieved with just supplies
My wants, and lent these robes that strike your eyes.
This is the truth: and oh, ye powers on high!
Forbid that want should sink me to a lie.”

To this the king: “Our daughter but express’d
Her cares imperfect to our godlike guest.
Suppliant to her, since first he chose to pray,
Why not herself did she conduct the way,
And with her handmaids to our court convey?”

“Hero and king (Ulysses thus replied)
Nor blame her faultless nor suspect of pride:
She bade me follow in the attendant train;
But fear and reverence did my steps detain,
Lest rash suspicion might alarm thy mind:
Man’s of a jealous and mistaken kind.”

“Far from my soul (he cried) the gods efface
All wrath ill-grounded, and suspicion base!
Whate’er is honest, stranger, I approve,
And would to Phœbus, Pallas, and to Jove,
Such as thou art, thy thought and mine were one,
Nor thou unwilling to be called my son.
In such alliance couldst thou wish to join,
A palace stored with treasures should be thine.
But if reluctant, who shall force thy stay?
Jove bids to set the stranger on his way,
And ships shall wait thee with the morning ray.
Till then, let slumber cross thy careful eyes:
The wakeful mariners shall watch the skies,
And seize the moment when the breezes rise:
Then gently waft thee to the pleasing shore,
Where thy soul rests, and labour is no more.
Far as Euboea though thy country lay,
Our ships with ease transport thee in a day.
Thither of old, earth’s giant son to view,
On wings of wind with Rhadamanth they flew;
This land, from whence their morning course begun,
Saw them returning with the setting sun.
Your eyes shall witness and confirm my tale,
Our youth how dexterous, and how fleet our sail,
When justly timed with equal sweep they row,
And ocean whitens in long tracks below.”

Thus he. No word the experienced man replies,
But thus to heaven (and heavenward lifts his eyes):
“O Jove! O father! what the king accords
Do thou make perfect! sacred be his words!
Wide o’er the world Alcinous’ glory shine!
Let fame be his, and ah! my country mine!”

Meantime Arete, for the hour of rest,
Ordains the fleecy couch, and covering vest;
Bids her fair train the purple quilts prepare,
And the thick carpets spread with busy care.
With torches blazing in their hands they pass’d,
And finish’d all their queen’s command with haste:
Then gave the signal to the willing guest:
He rose with pleasure, and retired to rest.
There, soft extended, to the murmuring sound
Of the high porch, Ulysses sleeps profound!
Within, released from cares, Alcinous lies;
And fast beside were closed Arete’s eyes.




BOOK VIII.


Alcinous calls a council, in which it is resolved to transport Ulysses
into his country. After which splendid entertainments are made, where
the celebrated musician and poet, Demodocus, plays and sings to the
guests. They next proceed to the games, the race, the wrestling,
discus, &c., where Ulysses casts a prodigious length, to the admiration
of all the spectators. They return again to the banquet and Demodocus
sings the loves of Mars and Venus. Ulysses, after a compliment to the
poet, desires him to sing the introduction of the wooden horse into
Troy, which subject provoking his tears, Alcinous inquires of his guest
his name, parentage, and fortunes.


Now fair Aurora lifts her golden ray,
And all the ruddy orient flames with day:
Alcinous, and the chief, with dawning light,
Rose instant from the slumbers of the night;
Then to the council-seat they bend their way,
And fill the shining thrones along the bay.

Meanwhile Minerva, in her guardian care,
Shoots from the starry vault through fields of air;
In form, a herald of the king, she flies
From peer to peer, and thus incessant cries;

“Nobles and chiefs who rule Phæacia’s states,
The king in council your attendance waits;
A prince of grace divine your aid implores,
O’er unknown seas arrived from unknown shores.”

She spoke, and sudden with tumultuous sounds
Of thronging multitudes the shore rebounds:
At once the seats they fill; and every eye
Glazed, as before some brother of the sky.
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
More high he treads, and more enlarged he moves:
She sheds celestial bloom, regard to draw;
And gives a dignity of mien, to awe;
With strength, the future prize of fame to play,
And gather all the honours of the day.

Then from his glittering throne Alcinous rose;
“Attend (he cried) while we our will disclose.
Your present aid this godlike stranger craves,
Toss’d by rude tempest through a war of waves;
Perhaps from realms that view the rising day,
Or nations subject to the western ray.
Then grant, what here all sons of woe obtain
(For here affliction never pleads in vain);
Be chosen youth prepared, expert to try
The vast profound and bid the vessel fly;
Launch the tall back, and order every oar;
Then in our court indulge the genial hour.
Instant, you sailors to this task attend;
Swift to the palace, all ye peers ascend;
Let none to strangers honours due disclaim:
Be there Demodocus the bard of fame,
Taught by the gods to please, when high he sings
The vocal lay, responsive to the strings.”

Thus spoke the prince; the attending peers obey;
In state they move; Alcinous heads the way
Swift to Demodocus the herald flies,
At once the sailors to their charge arise;
They launch the vessel, and unfurl the sails,
And stretch the swelling canvas to the gales;
Then to the palace move: a gathering throng,
Youth, and white age, tumultuous pour along.
Now all accesses to the dome are fill’d;
Eight boars, the choicest of the herd, are kill’d;
Two beeves, twelve fatlings, from the flock they bring
To crown the feast; so wills the bounteous king.
The herald now arrives, and guides along
The sacred master of celestial song;
Dear to the Muse! who gave his days to flow
With mighty blessings, mix’d with mighty woe;
With clouds of darkness quench’d his visual ray,
But gave him skill to raise the lofty lay.
High on a radiant throne sublime in state,
Encircled by huge multitudes, he sate;
With silver shone the throne; his lyre, well strung
To rapturous sounds, at hand Poutonous hung.
Before his seat a polish’d table shines,
And a full goblet foams with generous wines;
His food a herald bore; and now they fed;
And now the rage of craving hunger fled.

Then, fired by all the Muse, aloud he sings
The mighty deeds of demigods and kings;
From that fierce wrath the noble song arose,
That made Ulysses and Achilles foes;
How o’er the feast they doom the fall of Troy;
The stern debate Atrides hears with joy;
For Heaven foretold the contest, when he trod
The marble threshold of the Delphic god,
Curious to learn the counsels of the sky,
Ere yet he loosed the rage of war on Troy.

Touch’d at the song, Ulysses straight resign’d
To soft affliction all his manly mind.
Before his eyes the purple vest he drew,
Industrious to conceal the falling dew;
But when the music paused, he ceased to shed
The flowing tear, and raised his drooping head;
And, lifting to the gods a goblet crown’d,
He pour’d a pure libation to the ground.

Transported with the song, the listening train
Again with loud applause demand the strain;
Again Ulysses veil’d his pensive head.
Again unmann’d, a shower of sorrows shed;
Conceal’d he wept; the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud—“O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice and mute the harmonious string;
Enough the feast has pleased, enough the power
Of heavenly song has crown’d the genial hour!
Incessant in the games your strength display,
Contest, ye brave the honours of the day!
That pleased the admiring stranger may proclaim
In distant regions the Phæacian fame:
None wield the gauntlet with so dire a sway,
Or swifter in the race devour the way;
None in the leap spring with so strong a bound,
Or firmer, in the wrestling, press the ground.”

Thus spoke the king; the attending peers obey;
In state they move, Alcinous lends the way;
His golden lyre Demodocus unstrung,
High on a column in the palace hung;
And guided by a herald’s guardian cares,
Majestic to the lists of Fame repairs.

Now swarms the populace: a countless throng,
Youth and hoar age; and man drives man along.
The games begin; ambitious of the prize,
Acroneus, Thoon, and Eretmeus rise;
The prize Ocyalus and Prymneus claim,
Anchialus and Ponteus, chiefs of fame.
There Proreus, Nautes, Eratreus, appear
And famed Amphialus, Polyneus’ heir;
Euryalus, like Mars terrific, rose,
When clad in wrath he withers hosts of foes;
Naubolides with grace unequall’d shone,
Or equall’d by Laodamas alone.
With these came forth Ambasineus the strong:
And three brave sons, from great Alcinous sprung.

Ranged in a line the ready racers stand,
Start from the goal, and vanish o’er the strand:
Swift as on wings of winds, upborne they fly,
And drifts of rising dust involve the sky.
Before the rest, what space the hinds allow
Between the mule and ox, from plough to plough,
Clytonius sprung: he wing’d the rapid way,
And bore the unrivall’d honours of the day.
With fierce embrace the brawny wrestlers join;
The conquest, great Euryalus, is thine.
Amphialus sprung forward with a bound,
Superior in the leap, a length of ground.
From Elatreus’ strong arm the discus flies,
And sings with unmatch’d force along the skies.
And Laodam whirls high, with dreadful sway,
The gloves of death, victorious in the fray.

While thus the peerage in the games contends,
In act to speak, Laodamas ascends.

“O friends (he cries), the stranger seems well skill’d
To try the illustrious labours of the field:
I deem him brave: then grant the brave man’s claim,
Invite the hero to his share of fame.
What nervous arms he boasts! how firm his tread!
His limbs how turn’d! how broad his shoulders spread!
By age unbroke!—but all-consuming care
Destroys perhaps the strength that time would spare:
Dire is the ocean, dread in all its forms!
Man must decay when man contends with storms.”

“Well hast thou spoke (Euryalus replies):
Thine is the guest, invite him thou to rise.”
Swift as the word, advancing from the crowd,
He made obeisance, and thus spoke aloud:

“Vouchsafes the reverend stranger to display
His manly worth, and share the glorious day?
Father, arise! for thee thy port proclaims
Expert to conquer in the solemn games.
To fame arise! for what more fame can yield
Than the swift race, or conflict of the field?
Steal from corroding care one transient day,
To glory give the space thou hast to stay;
Short is the time, and lo! e’en now the gales
Call thee aboard, and stretch the swelling sails.”

To whom with sighs Ulysses gave reply:
“Ah why the ill-suiting pastime must I try?
To gloomy care my thoughts alone are free;
Ill the gay sports with troubled hearts agree;
Sad from my natal hour my days have ran,
A much-afflicted, much-enduring man!
Who, suppliant to the king and peers, implores
A speedy voyage to his native shore.”

“Wide wanders, Laodam, thy erring tongue
The sports of glory to the brave belong
(Retorts Euryalus): he bears no claim
Among the great, unlike the sons of Fame.
A wandering merchant he frequents the main
Some mean seafarer in pursuit of gain;
Studious of freight, in naval trade well skill’d,
But dreads the athletic labours of the field.”

Incensed, Ulysses with a frown replies:
“O forward to proclaim thy soul unwise!
With partial hands the gods their gifts dispense;
Some greatly think, some speak with manly sense;
Here Heaven an elegance of form denies,
But wisdom the defect of form supplies;
This man with energy of thought controls,
And steals with modest violence our souls;
He speaks reservedly, but he speaks with force,
Nor can one word be changed but for a worse;
In public more than mortal he appears,
And as he moves, the praising crowd reveres;
While others, beauteous as the etherial kind,
The nobler portion went, a knowing mind,
In outward show Heaven gives thee to excel.
But Heaven denies the praise of thinking well
I’ll bear the brave a rude ungovern’d tongue,
And, youth, my generous soul resents the wrong.
Skill’d in heroic exercise, I claim
A post of honour with the sons of Fame.
Such was my boast while vigour crown’d my days,
Now care surrounds me, and my force decays;
Inured a melancholy part to bear
In scenes of death, by tempest and by war
Yet thus by woes impair’d, no more I waive
To prove the hero—slander stings the brave.”

Then gliding forward with a furious bound
He wrench’d a rocky fragment from the ground
By far more ponderous, and more huge by far
Than what Phæacia’s sons discharged in air.
Fierce from his arm the enormous load he flings;
Sonorous through the shaded air it sings;
Couch’d to the earth, tempestuous as it flies,
The crowd gaze upward while it cleaves the skies.
Beyond all marks, with many a giddy round
Down-rushing, it up-turns a hill of ground.

That Instant Pallas, bursting from a cloud,
Fix’d a distinguish’d mark, and cried aloud:

“E’en he who, sightless, wants his visual ray
May by his touch alone award the day:
Thy signal throw transcends the utmost bound
Of every champion by a length of ground:
Securely bid the strongest of the train
Arise to throw; the strongest throws in vain.”

She spoke: and momentary mounts the sky:
The friendly voice Ulysses hears with joy.
Then thus aloud (elate with decent pride)
“Rise, ye Phæacians, try your force (he cried):
If with this throw the strongest caster vie,
Still, further still, I bid the discus fly.
Stand forth, ye champions, who the gauntlet wield,
Or ye, the swiftest racers of the field!
Stand forth, ye wrestlers, who these pastimes grace!
I wield the gauntlet, and I run the race.
In such heroic games I yield to none,
Or yield to brave Laodamas alone:
Shall I with brave Laodamas contend?
A friend is sacred, and I style him friend.
Ungenerous were the man, and base of heart,
Who takes the kind, and pays the ungrateful part:
Chiefly the man, in foreign realms confined,
Base to his friend, to his own interest blind:
All, all your heroes I this day defy;
Give me a man that we our might may try.
Expert in every art, I boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill;
Should a whole host at once discharge the bow,
My well-aim’d shaft with death prevents the foe:
Alone superior in the field of Troy,
Great Philoctetes taught the shaft to fly.
From all the sons of earth unrivall’d praise
I justly claim; but yield to better days,
To those famed days when great Alcides rose,
And Eurytus, who bade the gods be foes
(Vain Eurytus, whose art became his crime,
Swept from the earth, he perish’d in his prime:
Sudden the irremeable way he trod,
Who boldly durst defy the bowyer god).
In fighting fields as far the spear I throw
As flies an arrow from the well-drawn bow.
Sole in the race the contest I decline,
Stiff are my weary joints, and I resign;
By storms and hunger worn; age well may fail,
When storms and hunger doth at once assail.”

Abash’d, the numbers hear the godlike man,
Till great Alcinous mildly thus began:

“Well hast thou spoke, and well thy generous tongue
With decent pride refutes a public wrong:
Warm are thy words, but warm without offence;
Fear only fools, secure in men of sense;
Thy worth is known. Then hear our country’s claim,
And bear to heroes our heroic fame:
In distant realms our glorious deeds display,
Repeat them frequent in the genial day;
When, blest with ease, thy woes and wanderings end,
Teach them thy consort, bid thy sons attend;
How, loved of Jove, he crown’d our sires with praise,
How we their offspring dignify our race.

“Let other realms the deathful gauntlet wield,
Or boast the glories of the athletic field:
We in the course unrivall’d speed display,
Or through cerulean billows plough the way;
To dress, to dance, to sing, our sole delight,
The feast or bath by day, and love by night:
Rise, then, ye skill’d in measures; let him bear
Your fame to men that breathe a distant air;
And faithful say, to you the powers belong
To race, to sail, to dance, to chant the song.

“But, herald, to the palace swift repair,
And the soft lyre to grace our pastimes bear.”

Swift at the word, obedient to the king,
The herald flies the tuneful lyre to bring.
Up rose nine seniors, chosen to survey
The future games, the judges of the day
With instant care they mark a spacious round
And level for the dance the allotted ground:
The herald bears the lyre: intent to play,
The bard advancing meditates the lay.
Skill’d in the dance, tall youths, a blooming band,
Graceful before the heavenly minstrel stand:
Light bounding from the earth, at once they rise,
Their feet half-viewless quiver in the skies:
Ulysses gazed, astonish’d to survey
The glancing splendours as their sandals play.
Meantime the bard, alternate to the strings,
The loves of Mars and Cytherea sings:
How the stern god, enamour’d with her charms
Clasp’d the gay panting goddess in his arms,
By bribes seduced; and how the sun, whose eye
Views the broad heavens, disclosed the lawless joy.
Stung to the soul, indignant through the skies
To his black forge vindictive Vulcan flies:
Arrived, his sinewy arms incessant place
The eternal anvil on the massy base.
A wondrous net he labours, to betray
The wanton lovers, as entwined they lay,
Indissolubly strong; Then instant bears
To his immortal dome the finish’d snares:
Above, below, around, with art dispread,
The sure inclosure folds the genial bed:
Whose texture even the search of gods deceives,
Thin as the filmy threads the spider weaves,
Then, as withdrawing from the starry bowers,
He feigns a journey to the Lemnian shores,
His favourite isle: observant Mars descries
His wish’d recess, and to the goddess flies;
He glows, he burns, the fair-hair’d queen of love
Descends, smooth gliding from the courts of Jove,
Gay blooming in full charms: her hand he press’d
With eager joy, and with a sigh address’d:

“Come, my beloved! and taste the soft delights:
Come, to repose the genial bed invites:
Thy absent spouse, neglectful of thy charms,
Prefers his barbarous Sintians to thy arms!”

Then, nothing loth, the enamour’d fair he led,
And sunk transported on the conscious bed.
Down rush’d the toils, inwrapping as they lay
The careless lovers in their wanton play:
In vain they strive; the entangling snares deny
(Inextricably firm) the power to fly.
Warn’d by the god who sheds the golden day,
Stern Vulcan homeward treads the starry way:
Arrived, he sees, he grieves, with rage he burns:
Full horribly he roars, his voice all heaven returns.

“O Jove (he cried) O all ye powers above,
See the lewd dalliance of the queen of love!
Me, awkward me, she scorns; and yields her charms
To that fair lecher, the strong god of arms.
If I am lame, that stain my natal hour
By fate imposed; such me my parent bore.
Why was I born? See how the wanton lies!
Oh sight tormenting to a husband’s eyes!
But yet, I trust, this once e’en Mars would fly
His fair-one’s arms—he thinks her, once, too nigh.
But there remain, ye guilty, in my power,
Till Jove refunds his shameless daughter’s dower.
Too dear I prized a fair enchanting face:
Beauty unchaste is beauty in disgrace.”

Meanwhile the gods the dome of Vulcan throng;
Apollo comes, and Neptune comes along;
With these gay Hermes trod the starry plain;
But modesty withheld the goddess train.
All heaven beholds, imprison’d as they lie,
And unextinguish’d laughter shakes the sky.
Then mutual, thus they spoke: “Behold on wrong
Swift vengeance waits; and art subdues the strong!
Dwells there a god on all the Olympian brow
More swift than Mars, and more than Vulcan slow?
Yet Vulcan conquers, and the god of arms
Must pay the penalty for lawless charms.”

Thus serious they; but he who gilds the skies,
The gay Apollo, thus to Hermes cries:
“Wouldst thou enchain’d like Mars, O Hermes, lie
And bear the shame like Mars to share the joy?”

“O envied shame! (the smiling youth rejoin’d;)
And thrice the chains, and thrice more firmly bind;
Gaze all ye gods, and every goddess gaze,
Yet eager would I bless the sweet disgrace.”

Loud laugh the rest, e’en Neptune laughs aloud,
Yet sues importunate to loose the god.
“And free, (he cries) O Vulcan! free from shame
Thy captives; I ensure the penal claim.”

“Will Neptune (Vulcan then) the faithless trust?
He suffers who gives surety for the unjust:
But say, if that lewd scandal of the sky,
To liberty restored, perfidious fly:
Say, wilt thou bear the mulct?” He instant cries,
“The mulct I bear, if Mars perfidious flies.”

To whom appeased: “No more I urge delay;
When Neptune sues, my part is to obey.”
Then to the snares his force the god applies;
They burst; and Mars to Thrace indignant flies:
To the soft Cyprian shores the goddess moves,
To visit Paphos and her blooming groves,
Where to the Power an hundred altars rise,
And breathing odours scent the balmy skies;
Concealed she bathes in consecrated bowers,
The Graces unguents shed, ambrosial showers,
Unguents that charm the gods! she last assumes
Her wondrous robes; and full the goddess blooms.

Thus sung the bard: Ulysses hears with joy,
And loud applauses read the vaulted sky.

Then to the sports his sons the king commands,
Each blooming youth before the monarch stands,
In dance unmatch’d! A wondrous ball is brought
(The work of Polypus, divinely wrought);
This youth with strength enormous bids it fly,
And bending backward whirls it to the sky;
His brother, springing with an active bound,
At distance intercepts it from the ground.
The ball dismissed, in dance they skim the strand,
Turn and return, and scarce imprint the sand.
The assembly gazes with astonished eyes,
And sends in shouts applauses to the skies.

Then thus Ulysses: “Happy king, whose name
The brightest shines in all the rolls of fame!
In subjects happy with surprise I gaze;
Thy praise was just; their skill transcends thy praise.”

Pleas’d with his people’s fame, the monarch hears,
And thus benevolent accosts the peers:
“Since wisdom’s sacred guidance he pursues,
Give to the stranger-guest a stranger’s dues:
Twelve princes in our realm dominion share,
O’er whom supreme, imperial power I bear;
Bring gold, a pledge of love: a talent bring,
A vest, a robe, and imitate your king.
Be swift to give: that he this night may share
The social feast of joy, with joy sincere.
And thou, Euryalus, redeem thy wrong;
A generous heart repairs a slanderous tongue.”

The assenting peers, obedient to the king,
In haste their heralds send the gifts to bring.
Then thus Euryalus: “O prince, whose sway
Rules this bless’d realm, repentant I obey;
Be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
A ruddy gleam; whose hilt a silver blaze;
Whose ivory sheath, inwrought with curious pride,
Adds graceful terror to the wearer’s side.”

He said, and to his hand the sword consign’d:
“And if (he cried) my words affect thy mind,
Far from thy mind those words, ye whirlwinds, bear,
And scatter them, ye storms, in empty air!
Crown, O ye heavens, with joy his peaceful hours,
And grant him to his spouse, and native shores.”

“And blest be thou, my friend, (Ulysses cries,)
Crown him with every joy, ye favouring skies
To thy calm hours continued peace afford,
And never, never mayst thou want this sword,”

He said, and o’er his shoulder flung the blade.
Now o’er the earth ascends the evening shade:
The precious gifts the illustrious heralds bear,
And to the court the embodied peers repair.
Before the queen Alcinous’ sons unfold
The vests, the robes, and heaps of shining gold;
Then to the radiant thrones they move in state:
Aloft, the king in pomp imperial sate.

Thence to the queen: “O partner of our reign,
O sole beloved! command thy menial train
A polish’d chest and stately robes to bear,
And healing waters for the bath prepare;
That, bathed, our guest may bid his sorrows cease,
Hear the sweet song, and taste the feast in peace.
A bowl that flames with gold, of wondrous frame,
Ourself we give, memorial of our name;
To raise in offerings to almighty Jove,
And every god that treads the courts above.”

Instant the queen, observant of the king,
Commands her train a spacious vase to bring,
The spacious vase with ample streams suffice,
Heap the high wood, and bid the flames arise.
The flames climb round it with a fierce embrace,
The fuming waters bubble o’er the blaze.
Herself the chest prepares; in order roll’d
The robes, the vests are ranged, and heaps of gold
And adding a rich dress inwrought with art,
A gift expressive of her bounteous heart.
Thus spoke to Ithacus: “To guard with bands
Insolvable these gifts, thy care demands;
Lest, in thy slumbers on the watery main,
The hand of rapine make our bounty vain.”

Then bending with full force around he roll’d
A labyrinth of bands in fold on fold,
Closed with Circaean art. A train attends
Around the bath: the bath the king ascends
(Untasted joy, since that disastrous hour,
He sail’d ill-fated from Calypso’s bower);
Where, happy as the gods that range the sky,
He feasted every sense with every joy.
He bathes; the damsels with officious toil,
Shed sweets, shed unguents, in a shower of oil;
Then o’er his limbs a gorgeous robe he spreads,
And to the feast magnificently treads.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Nausicaa blooming as a goddess stands;
With wondering eyes the hero she survey’d,
And graceful thus began the royal maid:

“Hail, godlike stranger! and when heaven restores
To thy fond wish thy long-expected shores,
This ever grateful in remembrance bear:
To me thou owest, to me, the vital air.”

“O royal maid! (Ulysses straight returns)
Whose worth the splendours of thy race adorns,
So may dread Jove (whose arm in vengeance forms
The writhen bolt, and blackens heaven with storms),
Restore me safe, through weary wanderings toss’d,
To my dear country’s ever-pleasing coast,
As while the spirit in this bosom glows,
To thee, my goddess, I address my vows;
My life, thy gift I boast!” He said, and sate
Fast by Alcinous on a throne of state.

Now each partakes the feast, the wine prepares,
Portions the food, and each his portion shares.
The bard a herald guides; the gazing throng
Pay low obeisance as he moves along:
Beneath a sculptur’d arch he sits enthroned,
The peers encircling form an awful round.
Then, from the chine, Ulysses carves with art
Delicious food, an honorary part:
“This, let the master of the lyre receive,
A pledge of love! ’tis all a wretch can give.
Lives there a man beneath the spacious skies
Who sacred honours to the bard denies?
The Muse the bard inspires, exalts his mind;
The muse indulgent loves the harmonious kind.”

The herald to his hand the charge conveys,
Not fond of flattery, nor unpleased with praise.

When now the rage of hunger was allay’d,
Thus to the lyrist wise Ulysses said:
“O more than man! thy soul the muse inspires,
Or Phœbus animates with all his fires;
For who, by Phœbus uninform’d, could know
The woe of Greece, and sing so well the woe?
Just to the tale, as present at the fray,
Or taught the labours of the dreadful day:
The song recalls past horrors to my eyes,
And bids proud Ilion from her ashes rise.
Once more harmonious strike the sounding string,
The Epaean fabric, framed by Pallas, sing:
How stern Ulysses, furious to destroy,
With latent heroes sack’d imperial Troy.
If faithful thou record the tale of Fame,
The god himself inspires thy breast with flame
And mine shall be the task henceforth to raise
In every land thy monument of praise.”

Full of the god he raised his lofty strain:
How the Greeks rush’d tumultuous to the main;
How blazing tents illumined half the skies,
While from the shores the winged navy flies;
How e’en in Ilion’s walls, in deathful bands,
Came the stern Greeks by Troy’s assisting hands:
All Troy up-heaved the steed; of differing mind,
Various the Trojans counsell’d: part consign’d
The monster to the sword, part sentence gave
To plunge it headlong in the whelming wave;
The unwise award to lodge it in the towers,
An offering sacred to the immortal powers:
The unwise prevail, they lodge it in the walls,
And by the gods’ decree proud Ilion falls:
Destruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful slaughter, fierce for human blood.

He sung the Greeks stern-issuing from the steed,
How Ilion burns, how all her fathers bleed;
How to thy dome, Deiphobus! ascends
The Spartan king; how Ithacus attends
(Horrid as Mars); and how with dire alarms
He fights—subdues, for Pallas strings his arms

Thus while he sung, Ulysses’ griefs renew,
Tears bathe his cheeks, and tears the ground bedew
As some fond matron views in mortal fight
Her husband falling in his country’s right;
Frantic through clashing swords she runs, she flies,
As ghastly pale he groans, and faints and dies;
Close to his breast she grovels on the ground,
And bathes with floods of tears the gaping wound;
She cries, she shrieks: the fierce insulting foe
Relentless mocks her violence of woe:
To chains condemn’d, as wildly she deplores;
A widow, and a slave on foreign shores.

So from the sluices of Ulysses’ eyes
Fast fell the tears, and sighs succeeded sighs:
Conceal’d he grieved: the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud: “O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice, and mute the tuneful string;
To every note his tears responsive flow,
And his great heart heaves with tumultuous woe;
Thy lay too deeply moves: then cease the lay,
And o’er the banquet every heart be gay:
This social right demands: for him the sails,
Floating in air, invite the impelling gales:
His are the gifts of love: the wise and good
Receive the stranger as a brother’s blood.

“But, friend, discover faithful what I crave;
Artful concealment ill becomes the brave:
Say what thy birth, and what the name you bore,
Imposed by parents in the natal hour?
(For from the natal hour distinctive names,
One common right, the great and lowly claims:)
Say from what city, from what regions toss’d,
And what inhabitants those regions boast?
So shalt thou instant reach the realm assign’d,
In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
Like man intelligent, they plough the tides,
Conscious of every coast, and every bay,
That lies beneath the sun’s all-seeing ray;
Though clouds and darkness veil the encumber’d sky,
Fearless through darkness and through clouds they fly;
Though tempests rage, though rolls the swelling main,
The seas may roll, the tempests rage in vain;
E’en the stern god that o’er the waves presides,
Safe as they pass, and safe repass the tides,
With fury burns; while careless they convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How Neptune raged, and how, by his command,
Firm rooted in a surge a ship should stand
A monument of wrath; how mound on mound
Should bury these proud towers beneath the ground.
But this the gods may frustrate or fulfil,
As suits the purpose of the Eternal Will.
But say through what waste regions hast thou stray’d
What customs noted, and what coasts survey’d;
Possess’d by wild barbarians fierce in arms,
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Say why the fate of Troy awaked thy cares,
Why heaved thy bosom, and why flowed thy tears?
Just are the ways of Heaven: from Heaven proceed
The woes of man; Heaven doom’d the Greeks to bleed,
A theme of future song! Say, then, if slain
Some dear-loved brother press’d the Phrygian plain?
Or bled some friend, who bore a brother’s part,
And claim’d by merit, not by blood, the heart?”




BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.
THE ADVENTURES OF THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI AND CYCLOPS.


Ulysses begins the relation of his adventures: how, after the
destruction of Troy, he with his companions made an incursion on the
Cicons, by whom they were repulsed; and, meeting with a storm, were
driven to the coast of the Lotophagi. From there they sailed to the
land of the Cyclops, whose manners and situation are particularly
characterised. The giant Polyphemus and his cave described; the usage
Ulysses and his companions met with there; and, lastly, the method and
artifice by which he escaped.


Then thus Ulysses: “Thou whom first in sway,
As first in virtue, these thy realms obey;
How sweet the products of a peaceful reign!
The heaven-taught poet and enchanting strain;
The well-filled palace, the perpetual feast,
A land rejoicing, and a people bless’d!
How goodly seems it ever to employ
Man’s social days in union and in joy;
The plenteous hoard high-heap’d with cates divine,
And o’er the foaming bowl the laughing wine!

“Amid these joys, why seeks thy mind to know
The unhappy series of a wanderer’s woe?
Rememberance sad, whose image to review,
Alas, I must open all my wounds anew!
And oh, what first, what last shall I relate,
Of woes unnumbered sent by Heaven and Fate?

“Know first the man (though now a wretch distress’d)
Who hopes thee, monarch, for his future guest.
Behold Ulysses! no ignoble name,
Earth sounds my wisdom and high heaven my fame.

“My native soil is Ithaca the fair,
Where high Neritus waves his woods in air;
Dulichium, Same and Zaccynthus crown’d
With shady mountains spread their isles around.
(These to the north and night’s dark regions run,
Those to Aurora and the rising sun).
Low lies our isle, yet bless’d in fruitful stores;
Strong are her sons, though rocky are her shores;
And none, ah none no lovely to my sight,
Of all the lands that heaven o’erspreads with light.
In vain Calypso long constrained my stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
With all her charms as vainly Circe strove,
And added magic to secure my love.
In pomps or joys, the palace or the grot,
My country’s image never was forgot;
My absent parents rose before my sight,
And distant lay contentment and delight.

“Hear, then, the woes which mighty Jove ordain’d
To wait my passage from the Trojan land.
The winds from Ilion to the Cicons’ shore,
Beneath cold Ismarus our vessels bore.
We boldly landed on the hostile place,
And sack’d the city, and destroy’d the race,
Their wives made captive, their possessions shared,
And every soldier found a like reward
I then advised to fly; not so the rest,
Who stay’d to revel, and prolong the feast:
The fatted sheep and sable bulls they slay,
And bowls flow round, and riot wastes the day.
Meantime the Cicons, to their holds retired,
Call on the Cicons, with new fury fired;
With early morn the gather’d country swarms,
And all the continent is bright with arms;
Thick as the budding leaves or rising flowers
O’erspread the land, when spring descends in showers:
All expert soldiers, skill’d on foot to dare,
Or from the bounding courser urge the war.
Now fortune changes (so the Fates ordain);
Our hour was come to taste our share of pain.
Close at the ships the bloody fight began,
Wounded they wound, and man expires on man.
Long as the morning sun increasing bright
O’er heaven’s pure azure spreads the glowing light,
Promiscuous death the form of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds;
But when his evening wheels o’erhung the main,
Then conquest crown’d the fierce Ciconian train.
Six brave companions from each ship we lost,
The rest escape in haste, and quit the coast,
With sails outspread we fly the unequal strife,
Sad for their loss, but joyful of our life.
Yet as we fled, our fellows’ rites we paid,
And thrice we call’d on each unhappy shade,

“Meanwhile the god, whose hand the thunder forms,
Drives clouds on clouds, and blackens heaven with storms:
Wide o’er the waste the rage of Boreas sweeps,
And night rush’d headlong on the shaded deeps.
Now here, now there, the giddy ships are borne,
And all the rattling shrouds in fragments torn.
We furl’d the sail, we plied the labouring oar,
Took down our masts, and row’d our ships to shore.
Two tedious days and two long nights we lay,
O’erwatch’d and batter’d in the naked bay.
But the third morning when Aurora brings,
We rear the masts, we spread the canvas wings;
Refresh’d and careless on the deck reclined,
We sit, and trust the pilot and the wind.
Then to my native country had I sail’d:
But, the cape doubled, adverse winds prevail’d.
Strong was the tide, which by the northern blast
Impell’d, our vessels on Cythera cast,
Nine days our fleet the uncertain tempest bore
Far in wide ocean, and from sight of shore:
The tenth we touch’d, by various errors toss’d,
The land of Lotus and the flowery coast.
We climb’d the beach, and springs of water found,
Then spread our hasty banquet on the ground.
Three men were sent, deputed from the crew
(A herald one) the dubious coast to view,
And learn what habitants possess’d the place.
They went, and found a hospitable race:
Not prone to ill, nor strange to foreign guest,
They eat, they drink, and nature gives the feast
The trees around them all their food produce:
Lotus the name: divine, nectareous juice!
(Thence call’d Lotophagi); which whose tastes,
Insatiate riots in the sweet repasts,
Nor other home, nor other care intends,
But quits his house, his country, and his friends.
The three we sent, from off the enchanting ground
We dragg’d reluctant, and by force we bound.
The rest in haste forsook the pleasing shore,
Or, the charm tasted, had return’d no more.
Now placed in order on their banks, they sweep
The sea’s smooth face, and cleave the hoary deep:
With heavy hearts we labour through the tide,
To coasts unknown, and oceans yet untried.

“The land of Cyclops first, a savage kind,
Nor tamed by manners, nor by laws confined:
Untaught to plant, to turn the glebe, and sow,
They all their products to free nature owe:
The soil, untill’d, a ready harvest yields,
With wheat and barley wave the golden fields;
Spontaneous wines from weighty clusters pour,
And Jove descends in each prolific shower,
By these no statues and no rights are known,
No council held, no monarch fills the throne;
But high on hills, or airy cliffs, they dwell,
Or deep in caves whose entrance leads to hell.
Each rules his race, his neighbour not his care,
Heedless of others, to his own severe.

“Opposed to the Cyclopean coast, there lay
An isle, whose hill their subject fields survey;
Its name Lachaea, crown’d with many a grove,
Where savage goats through pathless thickets rove:
No needy mortals here, with hunger bold,
Or wretched hunters through the wintry cold
Pursue their flight; but leave them safe to bound
From hill to hill, o’er all the desert ground.
Nor knows the soil to feed the fleecy care,
Or feels the labours of the crooked share;
But uninhabited, untill’d, unsown,
It lies, and breeds the bleating goat alone.
For there no vessel with vermilion prore,
Or bark of traffic, glides from shore to shore;
The rugged race of savages, unskill’d
The seas to traverse, or the ships to build,
Gaze on the coast, nor cultivate the soil,
Unlearn’d in all the industrious art of toil,
Yet here all products and all plants abound,
Sprung from the fruitful genius of the ground;
Fields waving high with heavy crops are seen,
And vines that flourish in eternal green,
Refreshing meads along the murmuring main,
And fountains streaming down the fruitful plain.

“A port there is, inclosed on either side,
Where ships may rest, unanchor’d and untied;
Till the glad mariners incline to sail,
And the sea whitens with the rising gale,
High at the head, from out the cavern’d rock,
In living rills a gushing fountain broke:
Around it, and above, for ever green,
The busy alders form’d a shady scene;
Hither some favouring god, beyond our thought,
Through all surrounding shade our navy brought;
For gloomy night descended on the main,
Nor glimmer’d Phoebe in the ethereal plain:
But all unseen the clouded island lay,
And all unseen the surge and rolling sea,
Till safe we anchor’d in the shelter’d bay:
Our sails we gather’d, cast our cables o’er,
And slept secure along the sandy shore.
Soon as again the rosy morning shone,
Reveal’d the landscape and the scene unknown,
With wonder seized, we view the pleasing ground,
And walk delighted, and expatiate round.
Roused by the woodland nymphs at early dawn,
The mountain goats came bounding o’er the lawn:
In haste our fellows to the ships repair,
For arms and weapons of the sylvan war;
Straight in three squadrons all our crew we part,
And bend the bow, or wing the missile dart;
The bounteous gods afford a copious prey,
And nine fat goats each vessel bears away:
The royal bark had ten. Our ships complete
We thus supplied (for twelve were all the fleet).

“Here, till the setting sun roll’d down the light,
We sat indulging in the genial rite:
Nor wines were wanting; those from ample jars
We drain’d, the prize of our Ciconian wars.
The land of Cyclops lay in prospect near:
The voice of goats and bleating flocks we hear,
And from their mountains rising smokes appear.
Now sunk the sun, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things: along the sea-beat shore
Satiate we slept: but, when the sacred dawn
Arising glitter’d o’er the dewy lawn,
I call’d my fellows, and these words address’d
‘My dear associates, here indulge your rest;
While, with my single ship, adventurous, I
Go forth, the manners of yon men to try;
Whether a race unjust, of barbarous might,
Rude and unconscious of a stranger’s right;
Or such who harbour pity in their breast,
Revere the gods, and succour the distress’d,’

“This said, I climb’d my vessel’s lofty side;
My train obey’d me, and the ship untied.
In order seated on their banks, they sweep
Neptune’s smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep.
When to the nearest verge of land we drew,
Fast by the sea a lonely cave we view,
High, and with darkening laurels covered o’er;
Where sheep and goats lay slumbering round the shore:
Near this, a fence of marble from the rock,
Brown with o’erarching pine and spreading oak.
A giant shepherd here his flock maintains
Far from the rest, and solitary reigns,
In shelter thick of horrid shade reclined;
And gloomy mischiefs labour in his mind.
A form enormous! far unlike the race
Of human birth, in stature, or in face;
As some lone mountain’s monstrous growth he stood,
Crown’d with rough thickets, and a nodding wood.
I left my vessel at the point of land,
And close to guard it, gave our crew command:
With only twelve, the boldest and the best,
I seek the adventure, and forsake the rest.
Then took a goatskin fill’d with precious wine,
The gift of Maron of Evantheus’ line
(The priest of Phœbus at the Ismarian shrine).
In sacred shade his honour’d mansion stood
Amidst Apollo’s consecrated wood;
Him, and his house, Heaven moved my mind to save,
And costly presents in return he gave;
Seven golden talents to perfection wrought,
A silver bowl that held a copious draught,
And twelve large vessels of unmingled wine,
Mellifluous, undecaying, and divine!
Which now, some ages from his race conceal’d,
The hoary sire in gratitude reveal’d.
Such was the wine: to quench whose fervent steam
Scarce twenty measures from the living stream
To cool one cup sufficed: the goblet crown’d
Breathed aromatic fragrances around.
Of this an ample vase we heaved aboard,
And brought another with provisions stored.
My soul foreboded I should find the bower
Of some fell monster, fierce with barbarous power;
Some rustic wretch, who lived in Heaven’s despite,
Contemning laws, and trampling on the right.
The cave we found, but vacant all within
(His flock the giant tended on the green):
But round the grot we gaze; and all we view,
In order ranged our admiration drew:
The bending shelves with loads of cheeses press’d,
The folded flocks each separate from the rest
(The larger here, and there the lesser lambs,
The new-fallen young here bleating for their dams:
The kid distinguish’d from the lambkin lies);
The cavern echoes with responsive cries.
Capacious chargers all around were laid.
Full pails, and vessels of the milking trade.
With fresh provisions hence our fleet to store
My friends advise me, and to quit the shore.
Or drive a flock of sheep and goats away,
Consult our safety, and put off to sea.
Their wholesome counsel rashly I declined,
Curious to view the man of monstrous kind,
And try what social rites a savage lends:
Dire rites, alas! and fatal to my friends

“Then first a fire we kindle, and prepare
For his return with sacrifice and prayer;
The loaden shelves afford us full repast;
We sit expecting. Lo! he comes at last,
Near half a forest on his back he bore,
And cast the ponderous burden at the door.
It thunder’d as it fell. We trembled then,
And sought the deep recesses of the den.
New driven before him through the arching rock,
Came tumbling, heaps on heaps, the unnumber’d flock.
Big-udder’d ewes, and goats of female kind
(The males were penn’d in outward courts behind);
Then, heaved on high, a rock’s enormous weight
To the cave’s mouth he roll’d, and closed the gate
(Scarce twenty four-wheel’d cars, compact and strong,
The massy load could bear, or roll along).
He next betakes him to his evening cares,
And, sitting down, to milk his flocks prepares;
Of half their udders eases first the dams,
Then to the mother’s teat submits the lambs;
Half the white stream to hardening cheese be press’d,
And high in wicker-baskets heap’d: the rest,
Reserved in bowls, supplied his nightly feast.
His labour done, he fired the pile, that gave
A sudden blaze, and lighted all the cave.
We stand discover’d by the rising fires;
Askance the giant glares, and thus inquires:

“‘What are ye, guests? on what adventure, say,
Thus far ye wander through the watery way?
Pirates perhaps, who seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, and expose your own?’

“His voice like thunder through the cavern sounds;
My bold companions thrilling fear confounds,
Appall’d at sight of more than mortal man!
At length, with heart recover’d, I began:

“‘From Troy’s famed fields, sad wanderers o’er the main,
Behold the relics of the Grecian train:
Through various seas, by various perils toss’d,
And forced by storms, unwilling on your coast;
Far from our destined course and native land,
Such was our fate, and such high Jove’s command!
Nor what we are befits us to disclaim,
Atrides’ friends (in arms a mighty name),
Who taught proud Troy and all her sons to bow;
Victors of late, but humble suppliants now!
Low at thy knee thy succour we implore;
Respect us, human, and relieve us, poor.
At least, some hospitable gift bestow;
’Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe;
’Tis what the gods require: those gods revere;
The poor and stranger are their constant care;
To Jove their cause, and their revenge belongs,
He wanders with them, and he feels their wrongs.”

“‘Fools that ye are (the savage thus replies,
His inward fury blazing at his eyes),
Or strangers, distant far from our abodes,
To bid me reverence or regard the gods.
Know then, we Cyclops are a race above
Those air-bred people, and their goat-nursed Jove;
And learn, our power proceeds with thee and thine,
Not as he wills, but as ourselves incline.
But answer, the good ship that brought ye o’er,
Where lies she anchor’d? near or off the shore?’

“Thus he. His meditated fraud I find
(Versed in the turns of various human-kind):
And, cautious thus: ‘Against a dreadful rock,
Fast by your shore the gallant vessel broke.
Scarce with these few I ’scaped; of all my train,
Whom angry Neptune, whelm’d beneath the main,
The scattered wreck the winds blew back again.’

“He answer’d with his deed: his bloody hand
Snatch’d two, unhappy! of my martial band;
And dash’d like dogs against the stony floor:
The pavement swims with brains and mingled gore.
Torn limb from limb, he spreads his horrid feast,
And fierce devours it like a mountain beast:
He sucks the marrow, and the blood he drains,
Nor entrails, flesh, nor solid bone remains.
We see the death from which we cannot move,
And humbled groan beneath the hand of Jove.
His ample maw with human carnage fill’d,
A milky deluge next the giant swill’d;
Then stretch’d in length o’er half the cavern’d rock,
Lay senseless, and supine, amidst the flock.
To seize the time, and with a sudden wound
To fix the slumbering monster to the ground,
My soul impels me! and in act I stand
To draw the sword; but wisdom held my hand.
A deed so rash had finished all our fate,
No mortal forces from the lofty gate
Could roll the rock. In hopeless grief we lay,
And sigh, expecting the return of day.
Now did the rosy-fingered morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies;
He wakes, he lights the fire, he milks the dams,
And to the mother’s teats submits the lambs.
The task thus finish’d of his morning hours,
Two more he snatches, murders, and devours.
Then pleased, and whistling, drives his flock before,
Removes the rocky mountain from the door,
And shuts again: with equal ease disposed,
As a light quiver’s lid is oped and closed.
His giant voice the echoing region fills:
His flocks, obedient, spread o’er all the hills.

“Thus left behind, even in the last despair
I thought, devised, and Pallas heard my prayer.
Revenge, and doubt, and caution, work’d my breast;
But this of many counsels seem’d the best:
The monster’s club within the cave I spied,
A tree of stateliest growth, and yet undried,
Green from the wood: of height and bulk so vast,
The largest ship might claim it for a mast.
This shorten’d of its top, I gave my train
A fathom’s length, to shape it and to plane;
The narrower end I sharpen’d to a spire,
Whose point we harden’d with the force of fire,
And hid it in the dust that strew’d the cave,
Then to my few companions, bold and brave,
Proposed, who first the venturous deed should try,
In the broad orbit of his monstrous eye
To plunge the brand and twirl the pointed wood,
When slumber next should tame the man of blood.
Just as I wished, the lots were cast on four:
Myself the fifth. We stand and wait the hour.
He comes with evening: all his fleecy flock
Before him march, and pour into the rock:
Not one, or male or female, stayed behind
(So fortune chanced, or so some god designed);
Then heaving high the stone’s unwieldy weight,
He roll’d it on the cave and closed the gate.
First down he sits, to milk the woolly dams,
And then permits their udder to the lambs.
Next seized two wretches more, and headlong cast,
Brain’d on the rock; his second dire repast.
I then approach’d him reeking with their gore,
And held the brimming goblet foaming o’er;
‘Cyclop! since human flesh has been thy feast,
Now drain this goblet, potent to digest;
Know hence what treasures in our ship we lost,
And what rich liquors other climates boast.
We to thy shore the precious freight shall bear,
If home thou send us and vouchsafe to spare.
But oh! thus furious, thirsting thus for gore,
The sons of men shall ne’er approach thy shore,
And never shalt thou taste this nectar more,’

“He heard, he took, and pouring down his throat,
Delighted, swill’d the large luxurious draught,
‘More! give me more (he cried): the boon be thine,
Whoe’er thou art that bear’st celestial wine!
Declare thy name: not mortal is this juice,
Such as the unbless’d Cyclopaean climes produce
(Though sure our vine the largest cluster yields,
And Jove’s scorn’d thunder serves to drench our fields);
But this descended from the bless’d abodes,
A rill of nectar, streaming from the gods.’

“He said, and greedy grasped the heady bowl,
Thrice drained, and poured the deluge on his soul.
His sense lay covered with the dozy fume;
While thus my fraudful speech I reassume.
‘Thy promised boon, O Cyclop! now I claim,
And plead my title; Noman is my name.
By that distinguish’d from my tender years,
’Tis what my parents call me, and my peers.

“The giant then: ‘Our promis’d grace receive,
The hospitable boon we mean to give:
When all thy wretched crew have felt my power,
Noman shall be the last I will devour.’

“He said: then nodding with the fumes of wine
Droop’d his huge head, and snoring lay supine.
His neck obliquely o’er his shoulders hung,
Press’d with the weight of sleep that tames the strong:
There belch’d the mingled streams of wine and blood,
And human flesh, his indigested food.
Sudden I stir the embers, and inspire
With animating breath the seeds of fire:
Each drooping spirit with bold words repair,
And urged my train the dreadful deed to dare.
The stake now glow’d beneath the burning bed
(Green as it was) and sparkled fiery red,
Then forth the vengeful instrument I bring;
With beating hearts my fellows form a ring.
Urged my some present god, they swift let fall
The pointed torment on his visual ball.
Myself above them from a rising ground
Guide the sharp stake, and twirl it round and round.
As when a shipwright stands his workmen o’er,
Who ply the wimble, some huge beam to bore;
Urged on all hands, it nimbly spins about,
The grain deep-piercing till it scoops it out:
In his broad eye he whirls the fiery wood;
From the pierced pupil spouts the boiling blood;
Singed are his brows; the scorching lids grow black;
The jelly bubbles, and the fibres crack.
And as when armourers temper in the ford
The keen-edged pole-axe, or the shining sword,
The red-hot metal hisses in the lake,
Thus in his eye-ball hiss’d the plunging stake.
He sends a dreadful groan, the rocks around
Through all their inmost winding caves resound.
Scared we recoiled. Forth with frantic hand,
He tore and dash’d on earth and gory brand;
Then calls the Cyclops, all that round him dwell,
With voice like thunder, and a direful yell.
From all their dens the one-eyed race repair,
From rifted rocks, and mountains bleak in air.
All haste assembled, at his well-known roar,
Inquire the cause, and crowd the cavern door.

“‘What hurts thee, Polypheme? what strange affright
Thus breaks our slumbers, and disturbs the night?
Does any mortal, in the unguarded hour
Of sleep, oppress thee, or by fraud or power?
Or thieves insidious thy fair flock surprise?’
Thus they; the Cyclop from his den replies:

“‘Friends, Noman kills me; Noman in the hour
Of sleep, oppresses me with fraudful power.’
‘If no man hurt thee, but the hand divine
Inflict disease, it fits thee to resign:
To Jove or to thy father Neptune pray.’
The brethren cried, and instant strode away.
“Joy touch’d my secret soul and conscious heart,
Pleased with the effect of conduct and of art.
Meantime the Cyclop, raging with his wound,
Spreads his wide arms, and searches round and round:
At last, the stone removing from the gate,
With hands extended in the midst he sate;
And search’d each passing sheep, and felt it o’er,
Secure to seize us ere we reach’d the door
(Such as his shallow wit he deem’d was mine);
But secret I revolved the deep design:
’Twas for our lives my labouring bosom wrought;
Each scheme I turn’d, and sharpen’d every thought;
This way and that I cast to save my friends,
Till one resolve my varying counsel ends.

“Strong were the rams, with native purple fair,
Well fed, and largest of the fleecy care,
These, three and three, with osier bands we tied
(The twining bands the Cyclop’s bed supplied);
The midmost bore a man, the outward two
Secured each side: so bound we all the crew,
One ram remain’d, the leader of the flock:
In his deep fleece my grasping hands I lock,
And fast beneath, in wooly curls inwove,
There cling implicit, and confide in Jove.
When rosy morning glimmer’d o’er the dales,
He drove to pasture all the lusty males:
The ewes still folded, with distended thighs
Unmilk’d lay bleating in distressful cries.
But heedless of those cares, with anguish stung,
He felt their fleeces as they pass’d along
(Fool that he was.) and let them safely go,
All unsuspecting of their freight below.

“The master ram at last approach’d the gate,
Charged with his wool, and with Ulysses’ fate.
Him while he pass’d, the monster blind bespoke:
‘What makes my ram the lag of all the flock?
First thou wert wont to crop the flowery mead,
First to the field and river’s bank to lead,
And first with stately step at evening hour
Thy fleecy fellows usher to their bower.
Now far the last, with pensive pace and slow
Thou movest, as conscious of thy master’s woe!
Seest thou these lids that now unfold in vain?
(The deed of Noman and his wicked train!)
Oh! did’st thou feel for thy afflicted lord,
And would but Fate the power of speech afford.
Soon might’st thou tell me, where in secret here
The dastard lurks, all trembling with his fear:
Swung round and round, and dash’d from rock to rock,
His battered brains should on the pavement smoke
No ease, no pleasure my sad heart receives,
While such a monster as vile Noman lives.’

“The giant spoke, and through the hollow rock
Dismiss’d the ram, the father of the flock.
No sooner freed, and through the inclosure pass’d,
First I release myself, my fellows last:
Fat sheep and goats in throngs we drive before,
And reach our vessel on the winding shore.
With joy the sailors view their friends return’d,
And hail us living whom as dead they mourn’d
Big tears of transport stand in every eye:
I check their fondness, and command to fly.
Aboard in haste they heave the wealthy sheep,
And snatch their oars, and rush into the deep.

“Now off at sea, and from the shallows clear,
As far as human voice could reach the ear,
With taunts the distant giant I accost:
‘Hear me, O Cyclop! hear, ungracious host!
’Twas on no coward, no ignoble slave,
Thou meditatest thy meal in yonder cave;
But one, the vengeance fated from above
Doom’d to inflict; the instrument of Jove.
Thy barbarous breach of hospitable bands,
The god, the god revenges by my hands.’

“These words the Cyclop’s burning rage provoke;
From the tall hill he rends a pointed rock;
High o’er the billows flew the massy load,
And near the ship came thundering on the flood.
It almost brush’d the helm, and fell before:
The whole sea shook, and refluent beat the shore,
The strong concussion on the heaving tide
Roll’d back the vessel to the island’s side:
Again I shoved her off: our fate to fly,
Each nerve we stretch, and every oar we ply.
Just ’scaped impending death, when now again
We twice as far had furrow’d back the main,
Once more I raise my voice; my friends, afraid,
With mild entreaties my design dissuade:
‘What boots the godless giant to provoke,
Whose arm may sink us at a single stroke?
Already when the dreadful rock he threw,
Old Ocean shook, and back his surges flew.
The sounding voice directs his aim again;
The rock o’erwhelms us, and we ’scaped in vain.’

“But I, of mind elate, and scorning fear,
Thus with new taunts insult the monster’s ear:
‘Cyclop! if any, pitying thy disgrace.
Ask, who disfigured thus that eyeless face?
Say ’twas Ulysses: ’twas his deed declare,
Laertes’ son, of Ithaca the fair;
Ulysses, far in fighting fields renown’d,
Before whose arm Troy tumbled to the ground.’

“The astonished savage with a roar replies:
‘Oh heavens! oh faith of ancient prophecies!
This, Telemus Eurymedes foretold
(The mighty seer who on these hills grew old;
Skill’d the dark fates of mortals to declare,
And learn’d in all wing’d omens of the air);
Long since he menaced, such was Fate’s command;
And named Ulysses as the destined hand.
I deem’d some godlike giant to behold,
Or lofty hero, haughty, brave, and bold;
Not this weak pigmy wretch, of mean design,
Who, not by strength subdued me, but by wine.
But come, accept our gifts, and join to pray
Great Neptune’s blessing on the watery way;
For his I am, and I the lineage own;
The immortal father no less boasts the son.
His power can heal me, and relight my eye;
And only his, of all the gods on high.’
“‘Oh! could this arm (I thus aloud rejoin’d)
From that vast bulk dislodge thy bloody mind,
And send thee howling to the realms of night!
As sure as Neptune cannot give thee sight.’
“Thus I; while raging he repeats his cries,
With hands uplifted to the starry skies?
‘Hear me, O Neptune; thou whose arms are hurl’d
From shore to shore, and gird the solid world;
If thine I am, nor thou my birth disown,
And if the unhappy Cyclop be thy son,
Let not Ulysses breathe his native air,
Laertes’ son, of Ithaca the fair.
If to review his country be his fate,
Be it through toils and sufferings long and late;
His lost companions let him first deplore;
Some vessel, not his own, transport him o’er;
And when at home from foreign sufferings freed,
More near and deep, domestic woes succeed!’
With imprecations thus he fill’d the air,
And angry Neptune heard the unrighteous prayer,
A larger rock then heaving from the plain,
He whirl’d it round: it sung across the main;
It fell, and brush’d the stern: the billows roar,
Shake at the weight, and refluent beat the shore.
With all our force we kept aloof to sea,
And gain’d the island where our vessels lay.
Our sight the whole collected navy cheer’d.
Who, waiting long, by turns had hoped and fear’d.
There disembarking on the green sea side,
We land our cattle, and the spoil divide;
Of these due shares to every sailor fall;
The master ram was voted mine by all;
And him (the guardian of Ulysses’ fate)
With pious mind to heaven I consecrate.
But the great god, whose thunder rends the skies,
Averse, beholds the smoking sacrifice;
And sees me wandering still from coast to coast,
And all my vessels, all my people, lost!
While thoughtless we indulge the genial rite,
As plenteous cates and flowing bowls invite;
Till evening Phœbus roll’d away the light;
Stretch’d on the shore in careless ease we rest,
Till ruddy morning purpled o’er the east;
Then from their anchors all our ships unbind,
And mount the decks, and call the willing wind.
Now, ranged in order on our banks we sweep.
With hasty strokes the hoarse-resounding deep;
Blind to the future, pensive with our fears,
Glad for the living, for the dead in tears.”




BOOK X.


ARGUMENT.
ADVENTURES WITH AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONS, AND CIRCE.


Ulysses arrives at the island of Æolus, who gives him prosperous
winds, and incloses the adverse ones in a bag, which his companions
untying, they are driven back again and rejected. Then they sail to the
Laestrygons, where they lose eleven ships, and, with only one
remaining, proceed to the island of Circe. Eurylochus is sent first
with some companions, all which, except Eurylochus, are transformed
into swine. Ulysses then undertakes the adventure, and, by the help of
Mercury, who gives him the herb Moly, overcomes the enchantress, and
procures the restoration of his men. After a year’s stay with her, he
prepares, at her instigation, for his voyage to the infernal shades.


“At length we reach’d Æolias’s sea-girt shore,
Where great Hippotades the sceptre bore,
A floating isle! high-raised by toil divine,
Strong walls of brass the rocky coast confine.
Six blooming youths, in private grandeur bred,
And six fair daughters, graced the royal bed;
These sons their sisters wed, and all remain
Their parents’ pride, and pleasure of their reign.
All day they feast, all day the bowls flow round,
And joy and music through the isle resound;
At night each pair on splendid carpets lay,
And crown’d with love the pleasures of the day.
This happy port affords our wandering fleet
A month’s reception, and a safe retreat.
Full oft the monarch urged me to relate
The fall of Ilion, and the Grecian fate;
Full oft I told: at length for parting moved;
The king with mighty gifts my suit approved.
The adverse winds in leathern bags he braced,
Compress’d their force, and lock’d each struggling blast.
For him the mighty sire of gods assign’d
The tempest’s lord, the tyrant of the wind;
His word alone the listening storms obey,
To smooth the deep, or swell the foamy sea.
These in my hollow ship the monarch hung,
Securely fetter’d by a silver thong:
But Zephyrus exempt, with friendly gales
He charged to fill, and guide the swelling sails:
Rare gift! but O, what gift to fools avails!

“Nine prosperous days we plied the labouring oar;
The tenth presents our welcome native shore:
The hills display the beacon’s friendly light,
And rising mountains gain upon our sight.
Then first my eyes, by watchful toils oppress’d,
Complied to take the balmy gifts of rest:
Then first my hands did from the rudder part
(So much the love of home possess’d my heart):
When lo! on board a fond debate arose;
What rare device those vessels might inclose?
What sum, what prize from Æolus I brought?
Whilst to his neighbour each express’d his thought:

“‘Say, whence ye gods, contending nations strive
Who most shall please, who most our hero give?
Long have his coffers groan’d with Trojan spoils:
Whilst we, the wretched partners of his toils,
Reproach’d by want, our fruitless labours mourn,
And only rich in barren fame return.
Now Æolus, ye see, augments his store:
But come, my friends, these mystic gifts explore,’
They said: and (oh cursed fate!) the thongs unbound!
The gushing tempest sweeps the ocean round;
Snatch’d in the whirl, the hurried navy flew,
The ocean widen’d and the shores withdrew.
Roused from my fatal sleep I long debate
If still to live, or desperate plunge to fate;
Thus doubting, prostrate on the deck I lay,
Till all the coward thoughts of death gave way.

“Meanwhile our vessels plough the liquid plain,
And soon the known AEolian coast regain;
Our groan the rocks remurmur’d to the main.
We leap’d on shore, and with a scanty feast
Our thirst and hunger hastily repress’d;
That done, two chosen heralds straight attend
Our second progress to my royal friend;
And him amidst his jovial sons we found;
The banquet steaming, and the goblets crown’d;
There humbly stoop’d with conscious shame and awe,
Nor nearer than the gate presumed to draw.
But soon his sons their well-known guest descried,
And starting from their couches loudly cried:
‘Ulysses here! what demon could’st thou meet
To thwart thy passage, and repel thy fleet?
Wast thou not furnish’d by our choicest care
For Greece, for home and all thy soul held dear?’
Thus they, In silence long my fate I mourn’d;
At length these words with accents low return’d:
`Me, lock’d in sleep, my faithless crew bereft
Of all the blessing of your godlike gift!
But grant, oh grant, our loss we may retrieve;
A favour you, and you alone can give.’

“Thus I with art to move their pity tried,
And touch’d the youths; but their stern sire replied:
‘Vile wretch, begone! this instant I command
Thy fleet accursed to leave our hallow’d land.
His baneful suit pollutes these bless’d abodes,
Whose fate proclaims him hateful to the gods.’

“Thus fierce he said: we sighing went our way,
And with desponding hearts put off to sea.
The sailors spent with toils their folly mourn,
But mourn in vain; no prospect of return
Six days and nights a doubtful course we steer,
The next proud Lamos’ stately towers appear,
And Laestrygonia’s gates arise distinct in air.
The shepherd, quitting here at night the plain,
Calls, to succeed his cares, the watchful swain;
But he that scorns the chains of sleep to wear,
And adds the herdsman’s to the shepherd’s care,
So near the pastures, and so short the way,
His double toils may claim a double pay,
And join the labours of the night and day.

“Within a long recess a bay there lies,
Edged round with cliffs high pointing to the skies;
The jutting shores that swell on either side
Contract its mouth, and break the rushing tide.
Our eager sailors seize the fair retreat,
And bound within the port their crowded fleet:
For here retired the sinking billows sleep,
And smiling calmness silver’d o’er the deep.
I only in the bay refused to moor,
And fix’d without, my halsers to the shore.

“From thence we climb’d a point, whose airy brow
Commands the prospect of the plains below;
No tracks of beasts, or signs of men, we found,
But smoky volumes rolling from the ground.
Two with our herald thither we command,
With speed to learn what men possess’d the land.
They went, and kept the wheel’s smooth-beaten road
Which to the city drew the mountain wood;
When lo! they met, beside a crystal spring,
The daughter of Antiphates the king;
She to Artacia’s silver streams came down;
(Artacia’s streams alone supply the town);
The damsel they approach, and ask’d what race
The people were? who monarch of the place?
With joy the maid the unwary strangers heard
And show’d them where the royal dome appear’d.
They went; but as they entering saw the queen
Of size enormous, and terrific mien
(Not yielding to some bulky mountain’s height),
A sudden horror struck their aching sight.
Swift at her call her husband scour’d away
To wreak his hunger on the destined prey;
One for his food the raging glutton slew,
But two rush’d out, and to the navy flew.

“Balk’d of his prey, the yelling monster flies,
And fills the city with his hideous cries;
A ghastly band of giants hear the roar,
And, pouring down the mountains, crowd the shore.
Fragments they rend from off the craggy brow
And dash the ruins on the ships below;
The crackling vessels burst; hoarse groans arise,
And mingled horrors echo to the skies;
The men like fish, they struck upon the flood,
And cramm’d their filthy throats with human food.
Whilst thus their fury rages at the bay,
My sword our cables cut, I call’d to weigh;
And charged my men, as they from fate would fly,
Each nerve to strain, each bending oar to ply.
The sailors catch the word, their oars they seize,
And sweep with equal strokes the smoky seas;
Clear of the rocks the impatient vessel flies;
Whilst in the port each wretch encumber’d dies.
With earnest haste my frighted sailors press,
While kindling transports glow’d at our success;
But the sad fate that did our friends destroy,
Cool’d every breast, and damp’d the rising joy.

“Now dropp’d our anchors in the Ææan bay,
Where Circe dwelt, the daughter of the Day!
Her mother Perse, of old Ocean’s strain,
Thus from the Sun descended, and the Main
(From the same lineage stern Aeaetes came,
The far-famed brother of the enchantress dame);
Goddess, the queen, to whom the powers belong
Of dreadful magic and commanding song.
Some god directing to this peaceful bay
Silent we came, and melancholy lay,
Spent and o’erwatch’d. Two days and nights roll’d on,
And now the third succeeding morning shone.
I climb’d a cliff, with spear and sword in hand,
Whose ridge o’erlook’d a shady length of land;
To learn if aught of mortal works appear,
Or cheerful voice of mortal strike the ear?
From the high point I mark’d, in distant view,
A stream of curling smoke ascending blue,
And spiry tops, the tufted trees above,
Of Circe’s palace bosom’d in the grove.

“Thither to haste, the region to explore,
Was first my thought: but speeding back to shore
I deem’d it best to visit first my crew,
And send our spies the dubious coast to view.
As down the hill I solitary go,
Some power divine, who pities human woe,
Sent a tall stag, descending from the wood,
To cool his fervour in the crystal flood;
Luxuriant on the wave-worn bank he lay,
Stretch’d forth and panting in the sunny ray.
I launch’d my spear, and with a sudden wound
Transpierced his back, and fix’d him to the ground.
He falls, and mourns his fate with human cries:
Through the wide wound the vital spirit flies.
I drew, and casting on the river’s side
The bloody spear, his gather’d feet I tied
With twining osiers which the bank supplied.
An ell in length the pliant wisp I weaved,
And the huge body on my shoulders heaved:
Then leaning on my spear with both my hands,
Upbore my load, and press’d the sinking sands
With weighty steps, till at the ship I threw
The welcome burden, and bespoke my crew:

“‘Cheer up, my friends! it is not yet our fate
To glide with ghosts through Pluto’s gloomy gate.
Food in the desert land, behold! is given!
Live, and enjoy the providence of heaven.’

“The joyful crew survey his mighty size,
And on the future banquet feast their eyes,
As huge in length extended lay the beast;
Then wash their hands, and hasten to the feast.
There, till the setting sun roll’d down the light,
They sate indulging in the genial rite.
When evening rose, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things, we slept along the shore.
But when the rosy morning warm’d the east,
My men I summon’d, and these words address’d:
“‘Followers and friends, attend what I propose:
Ye sad companions of Ulysses’ woes!
We know not here what land before us lies,
Or to what quarter now we turn our eyes,
Or where the sun shall set, or where shall rise.
Here let us think (if thinking be not vain)
If any counsel, any hope remain.
Alas! from yonder promontory’s brow
I view’d the coast, a region flat and low;
An isle encircled with the boundless flood;
A length of thickets, and entangled wood.
Some smoke I saw amid the forest rise,
And all around it only seas and skies!’

“With broken hearts my sad companions stood,
Mindful of Cyclops and his human food,
And horrid Laestrygons, the men of blood.
Presaging tears apace began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain.
In equal parts I straight divide my band,
And name a chief each party to command;
I led the one, and of the other side
Appointed brave Eurylochus the guide.
Then in the brazen helm the lots we throw,
And fortune casts Eurylochus to go;
He march’d with twice eleven in his train;
Pensive they march, and pensive we remain.

“The palace in a woody vale they found,
High raised of stone; a shaded space around;
Where mountain wolves and brindled lions roam,
(By magic tamed,) familiar to the dome.
With gentle blandishment our men they meet,
And wag their tails, and fawning lick their feet.
As from some feast a man returning late,
His faithful dogs all meet him at the gate,
Rejoicing round, some morsel to receive,
(Such as the good man ever used to give,)
Domestic thus the grisly beasts drew near;
They gaze with wonder not unmix’d with fear.
Now on the threshold of the dome they stood,
And heard a voice resounding through the wood:
Placed at her loom within, the goddess sung;
The vaulted roofs and solid pavement rung.
O’er the fair web the rising figures shine,
Immortal labour! worthy hands divine.
Polites to the rest the question moved
(A gallant leader, and a man I loved):

“‘What voice celestial, chanting to the loom
(Or nymph, or goddess), echoes from the room?
Say, shall we seek access?’ With that they call;
And wide unfold the portals of the hall.

“The goddess, rising, asks her guests to stay,
Who blindly follow where she leads the way.
Eurylochus alone of all the band,
Suspecting fraud, more prudently remain’d.
On thrones around with downy coverings graced,
With semblance fair, the unhappy men she placed.
Milk newly press’d, the sacred flour of wheat,
And honey fresh, and Pramnian wines the treat:
But venom’d was the bread, and mix’d the bowl,
With drugs of force to darken all the soul:
Soon in the luscious feast themselves they lost,
And drank oblivion of their native coast.
Instant her circling wand the goddess waves,
To hogs transforms them, and the sty receives.
No more was seen the human form divine;
Head, face, and members, bristle into swine:
Still cursed with sense, their minds remain alone,
And their own voice affrights them when they groan.
Meanwhile the goddess in disdain bestows
The mast and acorn, brutal food! and strows
The fruits and cornel, as their feast, around;
Now prone and grovelling on unsavoury ground.

“Eurylochus, with pensive steps and slow.
Aghast returns; the messenger of woe,
And bitter fate. To speak he made essay,
In vain essay’d, nor would his tongue obey.
His swelling heart denied the words their way:
But speaking tears the want of words supply,
And the full soul bursts copious from his eye.
Affrighted, anxious for our fellows’ fates,
We press to hear what sadly he relates:

“We went, Ulysses! (such was thy command)
Through the lone thicket and the desert land.
A palace in a woody vale we found
Brown with dark forests, and with shades around.
A voice celestial echoed through the dome,
Or nymph or goddess, chanting to the loom.
Access we sought, nor was access denied:
Radiant she came: the portals open’d wide:
The goddess mild invites the guests to stay:
They blindly follow where she leads the way.
I only wait behind of all the train:
I waited long, and eyed the doors in vain:
The rest are vanish’d, none repass’d the gate,
And not a man appears to tell their fate.’

“I heard, and instant o’er my shoulder flung
The belt in which my weighty falchion hung
(A beamy blade): then seized the bended bow,
And bade him guide the way, resolved to go.
He, prostrate falling, with both hands embraced
My knees, and weeping thus his suit address’d:

“‘O king, beloved of Jove, thy servant spare,
And ah, thyself the rash attempt forbear!
Never, alas! thou never shalt return,
Or see the wretched for whose loss we mourn.
With what remains from certain ruin fly,
And save the few not fated yet to die.’

“I answer’d stern: ‘Inglorious then remain,
Here feast and loiter, and desert thy train.
Alone, unfriended, will I tempt my way;
The laws of fate compel, and I obey.’
This said, and scornful turning from the shore
My haughty step, I stalk’d the valley o’er.
Till now approaching nigh the magic bower,
Where dwelt the enchantress skill’d in herbs of power,
A form divine forth issued from the wood
(Immortal Hermes with the golden rod)
In human semblance. On his bloomy face
Youth smiled celestial, with each opening grace.
He seized my hand, and gracious thus began:
‘Ah whither roam’st thou, much-enduring man?
O blind to fate! what led thy steps to rove
The horrid mazes of this magic grove?
Each friend you seek in yon enclosure lies,
All lost their form, and habitants of sties.
Think’st thou by wit to model their escape?
Sooner shalt thou, a stranger to thy shape,
Fall prone their equal: first thy danger know,
Then take the antidote the gods bestow.
The plant I give through all the direful bower
Shall guard thee, and avert the evil hour.
Now hear her wicked arts: Before thy eyes
The bowl shall sparkle, and the banquet rise;
Take this, nor from the faithless feast abstain,
For temper’d drugs and poison shall be vain.
Soon as she strikes her wand, and gives the word,
Draw forth and brandish thy refulgent sword,
And menace death: those menaces shall move
Her alter’d mind to blandishment and love.
Nor shun the blessing proffer’d to thy arms,
Ascend her bed, and taste celestial charms;
So shall thy tedious toils a respite find,
And thy lost friends return to human kind.
But swear her first by those dread oaths that tie
The powers below, the blessed in the sky;
Lest to thee naked secret fraud be meant,
Or magic bind thee cold and impotent.’

“Thus while he spoke, the sovereign plant he drew
Where on the all-bearing earth unmark’d it grew,
And show’d its nature and its wondrous power:
Black was the root, but milky white the flower;
Moly the name, to mortals hard to find,
But all is easy to the ethereal kind.
This Hermes gave, then, gliding off the glade,
Shot to Olympus from the woodland shade.
While, full of thought, revolving fates to come,
I speed my passage to the enchanted dome.
Arrived, before the lofty gates I stay’d;
The lofty gates the goddess wide display’d;
She leads before, and to the feast invites;
I follow sadly to the magic rites.
Radiant with starry studs, a silver seat
Received my limbs: a footstool eased my feet,
She mix’d the potion, fraudulent of soul;
The poison mantled in the golden bowl.
I took, and quaff’d it, confident in heaven.
Then waved the wand, and then the word was given.
‘Hence to thy fellows! (dreadful she began:)
Go, be a beast!’—I heard, and yet was man.

“Then, sudden whirling, like a waving flame,
My beamy falchion, I assault the dame.
Struck with unusual fear, she trembling cries,
She faints, she falls; she lifts her weeping eyes.

“‘What art thou? say! from whence, from whom you came?
O more than human! tell thy race, thy name.
Amazing strength, these poisons to sustain!
Not mortal thou, nor mortal is thy brain.
Or art thou he, the man to come (foretold
By Hermes, powerful with the wand of gold),
The man from Troy, who wander’d ocean round;
The man for wisdom’s various arts renown’d,
Ulysses? Oh! thy threatening fury cease;
Sheathe thy bright sword, and join our hands in peace!
Let mutual joys our mutual trust combine,
And love, and love-born confidence, be thine.’

“‘And how, dread Circe! (furious I rejoin)
Can love, and love-born confidence, be mine,
Beneath thy charms when my companions groan,
Transform’d to beasts, with accents not their own?
O thou of fraudful heart, shall I be led
To share thy feast-rites, or ascend thy bed;
That, all unarm’d, thy vengeance may have vent,
And magic bind me, cold and impotent?
Celestial as thou art, yet stand denied;
Or swear that oath by which the gods are tied,
Swear, in thy soul no latent frauds remain,
Swear by the vow which never can be vain.’

“The goddess swore: then seized my hand, and led
To the sweet transports of the genial bed.
Ministrant to the queen, with busy care
Four faithful handmaids the soft rites prepare;
Nymphs sprung from fountains, or from shady woods,
Or the fair offspring of the sacred floods.
One o’er the couches painted carpets threw,
Whose purple lustre glow’d against the view:
White linen lay beneath. Another placed
The silver stands, with golden flaskets graced:
With dulcet beverage this the beaker crown’d,
Fair in the midst, with gilded cups around:
That in the tripod o’er the kindled pile
The water pours; the bubbling waters boil;
An ample vase receives the smoking wave;
And, in the bath prepared, my limbs I lave:
Reviving sweets repair the mind’s decay,
And take the painful sense of toil away.
A vest and tunic o’er me next she threw,
Fresh from the bath, and dropping balmy dew;
Then led and placed me on the sovereign seat,
With carpets spread; a footstool at my feet.
The golden ewer a nymph obsequious brings,
Replenish’d from the cool translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size.
I wash’d. The table in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Circe in vain invites the feast to share;
Absent I ponder, and absorb’d in care;
While scenes of woe rose anxious in my breast,
The queen beheld me, and these words address’d:

“‘Why sits Ulysses silent and apart,
Some hoard of grief close harbour’d at his heart
Untouch’d before thee stand the cates divine,
And unregarded laughs the rosy wine.
Can yet a doubt or any dread remain,
When sworn that oath which never can be vain?’

“I answered: ‘Goddess! human is my breast,
By justice sway’d, by tender pity press’d:
Ill fits it me, whose friends are sunk to beasts,
To quaff thy bowls, or riot in thy feasts.
Me would’st thou please? for them thy cares employ,
And them to me restore, and me to joy.’

“With that she parted: in her potent hand
She bore the virtue of the magic wand.
Then, hastening to the sties, set wide the door,
Urged forth, and drove the bristly herd before;
Unwieldy, out they rush’d with general cry,
Enormous beasts, dishonest to the eye.
Now touch’d by counter-charms they change again,
And stand majestic, and recall’d to men.
Those hairs of late that bristled every part,
Fall off, miraculous effect of art!
Till all the form in full proportion rise,
More young, more large, more graceful to my eyes.
They saw, they knew me, and with eager pace
Clung to their master in a long embrace:
Sad, pleasing sight! with tears each eye ran o’er,
And sobs of joy re-echoed through the bower;
E’en Circe wept, her adamantine heart
Felt pity enter, and sustain’d her part.

“‘Son of Laertes! (then the queen began)
Oh much-enduring, much experienced man!
Haste to thy vessel on the sea-beat shore,
Unload thy treasures, and the galley moor;
Then bring thy friends, secure from future harms,
And in our grottoes stow thy spoils and arms,’

“She said. Obedient to her high command
I quit the place, and hasten to the strand,
My sad companions on the beach I found,
Their wistful eyes in floods of sorrow drown’d.

“As from fresh pastures and the dewy field
(When loaded cribs their evening banquet yield)
The lowing herds return; around them throng
With leaps and bounds their late imprison’d young,
Rush to their mothers with unruly joy,
And echoing hills return the tender cry:
So round me press’d, exulting at my sight,
With cries and agonies of wild delight,
The weeping sailors; nor less fierce their joy
Than if return’d to Ithaca from Troy.
‘Ah master! ever honour’d, ever dear!
(These tender words on every side I hear)
What other joy can equal thy return?
Not that loved country for whose sight we mourn,
The soil that nursed us, and that gave us breath:
But ah! relate our lost companions’ death.’

“I answer’d cheerful: ‘Haste, your galley moor,
And bring our treasures and our arms ashore:
Those in yon hollow caverns let us lay,
Then rise, and follow where I lead the way.
Your fellows live; believe your eyes, and come
To taste the joys of Circe’s sacred dome.’

“With ready speed the joyful crew obey:
Alone Eurylochus persuades their stay.

“‘Whither (he cried), ah whither will ye run?
Seek ye to meet those evils ye should shun?
Will you the terrors of the dome explore,
In swine to grovel, or in lions roar,
Or wolf-like howl away the midnight hour
In dreadful watch around the magic bower?
Remember Cyclops, and his bloody deed;
The leader’s rashness made the soldiers bleed.’

“I heard incensed, and first resolved to speed
My flying falchion at the rebel’s head.
Dear as he was, by ties of kindred bound,
This hand had stretch’d him breathless on the ground.
But all at once my interposing train
For mercy pleaded, nor could plead in vain.
‘Leave here the man who dares his prince desert,
Leave to repentance and his own sad heart,
To guard the ship. Seek we the sacred shades
Of Circe’s palace, where Ulysses leads.’

“This with one voice declared, the rising train
Left the black vessel by the murmuring main.
Shame touch’d Eurylochus’ alter’d breast:
He fear’d my threats, and follow’d with the rest.

“Meanwhile the goddess, with indulgent cares
And social joys, the late transform’d repairs;
The bath, the feast, their fainting soul renews:
Rich in refulgent robes, and dropping balmy dews:
Brightening with joy, their eager eyes behold,
Each other’s face, and each his story told;
Then gushing tears the narrative confound,
And with their sobs the vaulted roof resound.
When hush’d their passion, thus the goddess cries:
‘Ulysses, taught by labours to be wise,
Let this short memory of grief suffice.
To me are known the various woes ye bore.
In storms by sea, in perils on the shore;
Forget whatever was in Fortune’s power,
And share the pleasures of this genial hour.
Such be your mind as ere ye left your coast,
Or learn’d to sorrow for a country lost.
Exiles and wanderers now, where’er ye go,
Too faithful memory renews your woe:
The cause removed, habitual griefs remain,
And the soul saddens by the use of pain.’

“Her kind entreaty moved the general breast;
Tired with long toil, we willing sunk to rest.
We plied the banquet, and the bowl we crown’d,
Till the full circle of the year came round.
But when the seasons following in their train,
Brought back the months, the days, and hours again;
As from a lethargy at once they rise,
And urge their chief with animating cries:

“‘Is this, Ulysses, our inglorious lot?
And is the name of Ithaca forgot?
Shall never the dear land in prospect rise,
Or the loved palace glitter in our eyes?’
“Melting I heard; yet till the sun’s decline
Prolong’d the feast, and quaff’d the rosy wine
But when the shades came on at evening hour,
And all lay slumbering in the dusky bower,
I came a suppliant to fair Circe’s bed,
The tender moment seized, and thus I said:
‘Be mindful, goddess! of thy promise made;
Must sad Ulysses ever be delay’d?
Around their lord my sad companions mourn,
Each breast beats homeward, anxious to return:
If but a moment parted from thy eyes,
Their tears flow round me, and my heart complies.’

“‘Go then (she cried), ah go! yet think, not I,
Not Circe, but the Fates, your wish deny.
Ah, hope not yet to breathe thy native air!
Far other journey first demands thy care;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
And view the realms of darkness and of death.
There seek the Theban bard, deprived of sight;
Within, irradiate with prophetic light;
To whom Persephone, entire and whole,
Gave to retain the unseparated soul:
The rest are forms, of empty ether made;
Impassive semblance, and a flitting shade.’

“Struck at the word, my very heart was dead:
Pensive I sate: my tears bedew’d the bed:
To hate the light and life my soul begun,
And saw that all was grief beneath the sun:
Composed at length the gushing tears suppress’d,
And my toss’d limbs now wearied into rest.
‘How shall I tread (I cried), ah, Circe! say,
The dark descent, and who shall guide the way?
Can living eyes behold the realms below?
What bark to waft me, and what wind to blow?’

“‘Thy fated road (the magic power replied),
Divine Ulysses! ask no mortal guide.
Rear but the mast, the spacious sail display,
The northern winds shall wing thee on thy way.
Soon shalt thou reach old Ocean’s utmost ends,
Where to the main the shelving shore descends;
The barren trees of Proserpine’s black woods,
Poplars and willows trembling o’er the floods:
There fix thy vessel in the lonely bay,
And enter there the kingdoms void of day,
Where Phlegethon’s loud torrents, rushing down,
Hiss in the flaming gulf of Acheron;
And where, slow rolling from the Stygian bed,
Cocytus’ lamentable waters spread:
Where the dark rock o’erhangs the infernal lake,
And mingling streams eternal murmurs make.
First draw thy falchion, and on every side
Trench the black earth a cubit long and wide:
To all the shades around libations pour,
And o’er the ingredients strew the hallow’d flour:
New wine and milk, with honey temper’d bring,
And living water from the crystal spring.
Then the wan shades and feeble ghosts implore,
With promised offerings on thy native shore;
A barren cow, the stateliest of the isle,
And heap’d with various wealth, a blazing pile:
These to the rest; but to the seer must bleed
A sable ram, the pride of all thy breed.
These solemn vows and holy offerings paid
To all the phantom nations of the dead,
Be next thy care the sable sheep to place
Full o’er the pit, and hellward turn their face:
But from the infernal rite thine eye withdraw,
And back to Ocean glance with reverend awe.
Sudden shall skim along the dusky glades
Thin airy shoals, and visionary shades.
Then give command the sacrifice to haste,
Let the flay’d victims in the flame be cast,
And sacred vows and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto and his gloomy bride.
Wide o’er the pool thy falchion waved around
Shall drive the spectres from unbidden ground:
The sacred draught shall all the dead forbear,
Till awful from the shades arise the seer.
Let him, oraculous, the end, the way,
The turns of all thy future fate display,
Thy pilgrimage to come, and remnant of thy day.’

“So speaking, from the ruddy orient shone
The morn, conspicuous on her golden throne.
The goddess with a radiant tunic dress’d
My limbs, and o’er me cast a silken vest.
Long flowing robes, of purest white, array
The nymph, that added lustre to the day:
A tiar wreath’d her head with many a fold;
Her waist was circled with a zone of gold.
Forth issuing then, from place to place I flew;
Rouse man by man, and animate my crew.
‘Rise, rise, my mates! ’tis Circe gives command:
Our journey calls us; haste, and quit the land.’
All rise and follow, yet depart not all,
For Fate decreed one wretched man to fall.

“A youth there was, Elpenor was he named,
Not much for sense, nor much for courage famed:
The youngest of our band, a vulgar soul,
Born but to banquet, and to drain the bowl.
He, hot and careless, on a turret’s height
With sleep repair’d the long debauch of night:
The sudden tumult stirred him where he lay,
And down he hasten’d, but forgot the way;
Full headlong from the roof the sleeper fell,
And snapp’d the spinal joint, and waked in hell.

“The rest crowd round me with an eager look;
I met them with a sigh, and thus bespoke:
‘Already, friends! ye think your toils are o’er,
Your hopes already touch your native shore:
Alas! far otherwise the nymph declares,
Far other journey first demands our cares;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
The dreary realms of darkness and of death;
To seek Tiresias’ awful shade below,
And thence our fortunes and our fates to know.’

“My sad companions heard in deep despair;
Frantic they tore their manly growth of hair;
To earth they fell: the tears began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain,
Sadly they fared along the sea-beat shore;
Still heaved their hearts, and still their eyes ran o’er.
The ready victims at our bark we found,
The sable ewe and ram together bound.
For swift as thought the goddess had been there,
And thence had glided, viewless as the air:
The paths of gods what mortal can survey?
Who eyes their motion? who shall trace their way?”




BOOK XI.


ARGUMENT.
THE DESCENT INTO HELL.


Ulysses continues his narration. How he arrived at the land of the
Cimmerians, and what ceremonies he performed to invoke the dead. The
manner of his descent, and the apparition of the shades: his
conversation with Elpenor, and with Tiresias, who informs him in a
prophetic manner of his fortunes to come. He meets his mother Anticlea,
from whom he learns the state of his family. He sees the shades of the
ancient heroines, afterwards of the heroes, and converses in particular
with Agamemnon and Achilles. Ajax keeps at a sullen distance, and
disdains to answer him. He then beholds Tityus, Tantalus, Sisyphus,
Hercules; till he is deterred from further curiosity by the apparition
of horrid spectres, and the cries of the wicked in torments.


“Now to the shores we bend, a mournful train,
Climb the tall bark, and launch into the main;
At once the mast we rear, at once unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind;
Then pale and pensive stand, with cares oppress’d,
And solemn horror saddens every breast.
A freshening breeze the magic power supplied,
While the wing’d vessel flew along the tide;
Our oars we shipp’d; all day the swelling sails
Full from the guiding pilot catch’d the gales.

“Now sunk the sun from his aërial height,
And o’er the shaded billows rush’d the night;
When lo! we reach’d old Ocean’s utmost bounds,
Where rocks control his waves with ever-during mounds.

“There in a lonely land, and gloomy cells,
The dusky nation of Cimmeria dwells;
The sun ne’er views the uncomfortable seats,
When radiant he advances, or retreats:
Unhappy race! whom endless night invades,
Clouds the dull air, and wraps them round in shades.

“The ship we moor on these obscure abodes;
Disbark the sheep, an offering to the gods;
And, hellward bending, o’er the beach descry
The doleful passage to the infernal sky.
The victims, vow’d to each Tartarian power,
Eurylochus and Perimedes bore.

“Here open’d hell, all hell I here implored,
And from the scabbard drew the shining sword:
And trenching the black earth on every side,
A cavern form’d, a cubit long and wide.
New wine, with honey-temper’d milk, we bring,
Then living waters from the crystal spring:
O’er these was strew’d the consecrated flour,
And on the surface shone the holy store.

“Now the wan shades we hail, the infernal gods,
To speed our course, and waft us o’er the floods:
So shall a barren heifer from the stall
Beneath the knife upon your altars fall;
So in our palace, at our safe return,
Rich with unnumber’d gifts the pile shall burn;
So shall a ram, the largest of the breed,
Black as these regions, to Tiresias bleed.

“Thus solemn rites and holy vows we paid
To all the phantom-nations of the dead;
Then died the sheep: a purple torrent flow’d,
And all the caverns smoked with streaming blood.
When lo! appear’d along the dusky coasts,
Thin, airy shoals of visionary ghosts:
Fair, pensive youths, and soft enamour’d maids;
And wither’d elders, pale and wrinkled shades;
Ghastly with wounds the forms of warriors slain
Stalk’d with majestic port, a martial train:
These and a thousand more swarm’d o’er the ground,
And all the dire assembly shriek’d around.
Astonish’d at the sight, aghast I stood,
And a cold fear ran shivering through my blood;
Straight I command the sacrifice to haste,
Straight the flay’d victims to the flames are cast,
And mutter’d vows, and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto, and his gloomy bride.

“Now swift I waved my falchion o’er the blood;
Back started the pale throngs, and trembling stood,
Round the black trench the gore untasted flows,
Till awful from the shades Tiresias rose.

“There wandering through the gloom I first survey’d,
New to the realms of death, Elpenor’s shade:
His cold remains all naked to the sky
On distant shores unwept, unburied lie.
Sad at the sight I stand, deep fix’d in woe,
And ere I spoke the tears began to flow.

“‘O say what angry power Elpenor led
To glide in shades, and wander with the dead?
How could thy soul, by realms and seas disjoin’d,
Outfly the nimble sail, and leave the lagging wind?

“The ghost replied: ‘To hell my doom I owe,
Demons accursed, dire ministers of woe!
My feet, through wine unfaithful to their weight,
Betray’d me tumbling from a towery height:
Staggering I reel’d, and as I reel’d I fell,
Lux’d the neck-joint—my soul descends to hell.
But lend me aid, I now conjure thee lend,
By the soft tie and sacred name of friend!
By thy fond consort! by thy father’s cares!
By loved Telemachus’ blooming years?
For well I know that soon the heavenly powers
Will give thee back to-day, and Circe’s shores:
There pious on my cold remains attend,
There call to mind thy poor departed friend.
The tribute of a tear is all I crave,
And the possession of a peaceful grave.
But if, unheard, in vain compassion plead,
Revere the gods. The gods avenge the dead!
A tomb along the watery margin raise,
The tomb with manly arms and trophies grace,
To show posterity Elpenor was.
There high in air, memorial of my name,
Fix the smooth oar, and bid me live to fame.’

“To whom with tears: ‘These rites, O mournful shade,
Due to thy ghost, shall to thy ghost be paid.’

“Still as I spoke the phantom seem’d to moan,
Tear follow’d tear, and groan succeeded groan.
But, as my waving sword the blood surrounds,
The shade withdrew, and mutter’d empty sounds.

“There as the wondrous visions I survey’d,
All pale ascends my royal mother’s shade:
A queen, to Troy she saw our legions pass;
Now a thin form is all Anticlea was!
Struck at the sight I melt with filial woe,
And down my cheek the pious sorrows flow,
Yet as I shook my falchion o’er the blood,
Regardless of her son the parent stood.

“When lo! the mighty Theban I behold,
To guide his steps he bore a staff of gold;
Awful he trod; majestic was his look!
And from his holy lips these accents broke:

“‘Why, mortal, wanderest thou from cheerful day,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
What angry gods to these dark regions led
Thee, yet alive, companion of the dead?
But sheathe thy poniard, while my tongue relates
Heaven’s steadfast purpose, and thy future fates.’

“While yet he spoke, the prophet I obey’d,
And in the scabbard plunged the glittering blade:
Eager he quaff’d the gore, and then express’d
Dark things to come, the counsels of his breast.

“Weary of light, Ulysses here explores
A prosperous voyage to his native shores;
But know—by me unerring Fates disclose
New trains of dangers, and new scenes of woes.
I see, I see, thy bark by Neptune toss’d,
For injured Cyclops, and his eyeball lost!
Yet to thy woes the gods decree an end,
If Heaven thou please: and how to please attend
Where on Trinacrian rocks the ocean roars,
Graze numerous herds along the verdant shores;
Though hunger press, yet fly the dangerous prey,
The herds are sacred to the god of day,
Who all surveys with his extensive eye,
Above, below, on earth, and in the sky!
Rob not the god; and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails:
But, if his herds ye seize, beneath the waves
I see thy friends o’erwhelm’d in liquid graves!
The direful wreck Ulysses scarce survives!
Ulysses at his country scarce arrives!
Strangers thy guides! nor there thy labours end;
New foes arise; domestic ills attend!
There foul adulterers to thy bride resort,
And lordly gluttons riot in thy court.
But vengeance hastes amain! These eyes behold
The deathful scene, princes on princes roll’d!
That done, a people far from sea explore,
Who ne’er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Or saw gay vessel stem the watery plain,
A painted wonder flying on the main!
Bear on thy back an oar: with strange amaze
A shepherd meeting thee, the oar surveys,
And names a van: there fix it on the plain,
To calm the god that holds the watery reign;
A threefold offering to his altar bring,
A bull, a ram, a boar; and hail the ocean king.
But home return’d, to each ethereal power
Slay the due victim in the genial hour:
So peaceful shalt thou end thy blissful days,
And steal thyself from life by slow decays:
Unknown to pain, in age resign thy breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft with death:
To the dark grave retiring as to rest,
Thy people blessing, by thy people bless’d!

“Unerring truths, O man, my lips relate;
This is thy life to come, and this is fate.’

“To whom unmoved: ‘If this the gods prepare,
What Heaven ordains the wise with courage bear.
But say, why yonder on the lonely strands,
Unmindful of her son, Anticlea stands?
Why to the ground she bends her downcast eye?
Why is she silent, while her son is nigh?
The latent cause, O sacred seer, reveal!’

“‘Nor this (replies the seer) will I conceal.
Know, to the spectres that thy beverage taste,
The scenes of life recur, and actions past:
They, seal’d with truth, return the sure reply;
The rest, repell’d, a train oblivious fly.’

“The phantom-prophet ceased, and sunk from sight,
To the black palace of eternal night.

“Still in the dark abodes of death I stood,
When near Anticlea moved, and drank the blood.
Straight all the mother in her soul awakes,
And, owning her Ulysses, thus she speaks;
‘Comest thou, my son, alive, to realms beneath,
The dolesome realms of darkness and of death!
Comest thou alive from pure, ethereal day?
Dire is the region, dismal is the way!
Here lakes profound, there floods oppose their waves,
There the wide sea with all his billows raves!
Or (since to dust proud Troy submits her towers)
Comest thou a wanderer from the Phrygian shores?
Or say, since honour call’d thee to the field,
Hast thou thy Ithaca, thy bride, beheld?’

“‘Source of my life,’ I cried, ‘from earth I fly
To seek Tiresias in the nether sky,
To learn my doom; for, toss’d from woe to woe,
In every land Ulysses finds a foe:
Nor have these eyes beheld my native shores,
Since in the dust proud Troy submits her towers.

“‘But, when thy soul from her sweet mansion fled,
Say, what distemper gave thee to the dead?
Has life’s fair lamp declined by slow decays,
Or swift expired it in a sudden blaze?
Say, if my sire, good old Laertes, lives?
If yet Telemachus, my son, survives?
Say, by his rule is my dominion awed,
Or crush’d by traitors with an iron rod?
Say, if my spouse maintains her royal trust;
Though tempted, chaste, and obstinately just?
Or if no more her absent lord she wails,
But the false woman o’er the wife prevails?’

“Thus I, and thus the parent-shade returns:
‘Thee, ever thee, thy faithful consort mourns:
Whether the night descends or day prevails,
Thee she by night, and thee by day bewails.
Thee in Telemachus thy realm obeys;
In sacred groves celestial rites he pays,
And shares the banquet in superior state,
Graced with such honours as become the great
Thy sire in solitude foments his care:
The court is joyless, for thou art not there!
No costly carpets raise his hoary head,
No rich embroidery shines to grace his bed;
Even when keen winter freezes in the skies,
Rank’d with his slaves, on earth the monarch lies:
Deep are his sighs, his visage pale, his dress
The garb of woe and habit of distress.
And when the autumn takes his annual round,
The leafy honours scattering on the ground,
Regardless of his years, abroad he lies,
His bed the leaves, his canopy the skies.
Thus cares on cares his painful days consume,
And bow his age with sorrow to the tomb!

“‘For thee, my son, I wept my life away;
For thee through hell’s eternal dungeons stray:
Nor came my fate by lingering pains and slow,
Nor bent the silver-shafted queen her bow;
No dire disease bereaved me of my breath;
Thou, thou, my son, wert my disease and death;
Unkindly with my love my son conspired,
For thee I lived, for absent thee expired.’

“Thrice in my arms I strove her shade to bind,
Thrice through my arms she slipp’d like empty wind,
Or dreams, the vain illusions of the mind.
Wild with despair, I shed a copious tide
Of flowing tears, and thus with sighs replied:

“‘Fliest thou, loved shade, while I thus fondly mourn!
Turn to my arms, to my embraces turn!
Is it, ye powers that smile at human harms!
Too great a bliss to weep within her arms?
Or has hell’s queen an empty image sent,
That wretched I might e’en my joys lament?’

“‘O son of woe,’ the pensive shade rejoin’d;
‘O most inured to grief of all mankind!
‘Tis not the queen of hell who thee deceives;
All, all are such, when life the body leaves:
No more the substance of the man remains,
Nor bounds the blood along the purple veins:
These the funereal flames in atoms bear,
To wander with the wind in empty air:
While the impassive soul reluctant flies,
Like a vain dream, to these infernal skies.
But from the dark dominions speed the way,
And climb the steep ascent to upper day:
To thy chaste bride the wondrous story tell,
The woes, the horrors, and the laws of hell.’

“Thus while she spoke, in swarms hell’s empress brings
Daughters and wives of heroes and of kings;
Thick and more thick they gather round the blood,
Ghost thronged on ghost (a dire assembly) stood!
Dauntless my sword I seize: the airy crew,
Swift as it flash’d along the gloom, withdrew;
Then shade to shade in mutual forms succeeds,
Her race recounts, and their illustrious deeds.

“Tyro began, whom great Salmoneus bred;
The royal partner of famed Cretheus’ bed.
For fair Enipeus, as from fruitful urns
He pours his watery store, the virgin burns;
Smooth flows the gentle stream with wanton pride,
And in soft mazes rolls a silver tide.
As on his banks the maid enamour’d roves,
The monarch of the deep beholds and loves;
In her Enipeus’ form and borrow’d charms
The amorous god descends into her arms:
Around, a spacious arch of waves he throws,
And high in air the liquid mountain rose;
Thus in surrounding floods conceal’d, he proves
The pleasing transport, and completes his loves.
Then, softly sighing, he the fair address’d,
And as he spoke her tender hand he press’d.
‘Hail, happy nymph! no vulgar births are owed
To the prolific raptures of a god:
Lo! when nine times the moon renews her horn,
Two brother heroes shall from thee be born;
Thy early care the future worthies claim,
To point them to the arduous paths of fame;
But in thy breast the important truth conceal,
Nor dare the secret of a god reveal:
For know, thou Neptune view’st! and at my nod
Earth trembles, and the waves confess their god.’

“He added not, but mounting spurn’d the plain,
Then plunged into the chambers of the main,

“Now in the time’s full process forth she brings
Jove’s dread vicegerents in two future kings;
O’er proud Iolcos Pelias stretch’d his reign,
And godlike Neleus ruled the Pylian plain:
Then, fruitful, to her Cretheus’ royal bed
She gallant Pheres and famed Aeson bred;
From the same fountain Amythaon rose,
Pleased with the din of scar; and noble shout of foes.

“There moved Antiope, with haughty charms,
Who bless’d the almighty Thunderer in her arms:
Hence sprung Amphion, hence brave Zethus came,
Founders of Thebes, and men of mighty name;
Though bold in open field, they yet surround
The town with walls, and mound inject on mound;
Here ramparts stood, there towers rose high in air,
And here through seven wide portals rush’d the war.

“There with soft step the fair Alcmena trod,
Who bore Alcides to the thundering god:
And Megara, who charm’d the son of Jove,
And soften’d his stern soul to tender love.

“Sullen and sour, with discontented mien,
Jocasta frown’d, the incestuous Theban queen;
With her own son she join’d in nuptial bands,
Though father’s blood imbrued his murderous hands
The gods and men the dire offence detest,
The gods with all their furies rend his breast;
In lofty Thebes he wore the imperial crown,
A pompous wretch! accursed upon a throne.
The wife self-murder’d from a beam depends,
And her foul soul to blackest hell descends;
Thence to her son the choicest plagues she brings,
And the fiends haunt him with a thousand stings.

“And now the beauteous Chloris I descry,
A lovely shade, Amphion’s youngest joy!
With gifts unnumber’d Neleus sought her arms,
Nor paid too dearly for unequall’d charms;
Great in Orchomenos, in Pylos great,
He sway’d the sceptre with imperial state.
Three gallant sons the joyful monarch told,
Sage Nestor, Periclimenus the bold,
And Chromius last; but of the softer race,
One nymph alone, a myracle of grace.
Kings on their thrones for lovely Pero burn;
The sire denies, and kings rejected mourn.
To him alone the beauteous prize he yields,
Whose arm should ravish from Phylacian fields
The herds of Iphyclus, detain’d in wrong;
Wild, furious herds, unconquerably strong!
This dares a seer, but nought the seer prevails,
In beauty’s cause illustriously he fails;
Twelve moons the foe the captive youth detains
In painful dungeons, and coercive chains;
The foe at last from durance where he lay,
His heart revering, give him back to day;
Won by prophetic knowledge, to fulfil
The steadfast purpose of the Almighty will.

“With graceful port advancing now I spied,
Leda the fair, the godlike Tyndar’s bride:
Hence Pollux sprung, who wields the furious sway
The deathful gauntlet, matchless in the fray;
And Castor, glorious on the embattled plain,
Curbs the proud steeds, reluctant to the rein:
By turns they visit this ethereal sky,
And live alternate, and alternate die:
In hell beneath, on earth, in heaven above,
Reign the twin-gods, the favourite sons of Jove.

“There Ephimedia trod the gloomy plain,
Who charm’d the monarch of the boundless main:
Hence Ephialtes, hence stern Otus sprung,
More fierce than giants, more than giants strong;
The earth o’erburden’d groan’d beneath their weight,
None but Orion e’er surpassed their height:
The wondrous youths had scarce nine winters told,
When high in air, tremendous to behold,
Nine ells aloft they rear’d their towering head,
And full nine cubits broad their shoulders spread.
Proud of their strength, and more than mortal size,
The gods they challenge, and affect the skies:
Heaved on Olympus tottering Ossa stood;
On Ossa, Pelion nods with all his wood.
Such were they youths! had they to manhood grown
Almighty Jove had trembled on his throne,
But ere the harvest of the beard began
To bristle on the chin, and promise man,
His shafts Apollo aim’d; at once they sound,
And stretch the giant monsters o’er the ground.

“There mournful Phaedra with sad Procris moves,
Both beauteous shades, both hapless in their loves;
And near them walk’d with solemn pace and slow,
Sad Adriadne, partner of their woe:
The royal Minos Ariadne bred,
She Theseus loved, from Crete with Theseus fled:
Swift to the Dian isle the hero flies,
And towards his Athens bears the lovely prize;
There Bacchus with fierce rage Diana fires,
The goddess aims her shaft, the nymph expires.

“There Clymene and Mera I behold,
There Eriphyle weeps, who loosely sold
Her lord, her honour, for the lust of gold.
But should I all recount, the night would fail,
Unequal to the melancholy tale:
And all-composing rest my nature craves,
Here in the court, or yonder on the waves;
In you I trust, and in the heavenly powers,
To land Ulysses on his native shores.”

He ceased; but left so charming on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem’d to hear,
Till, rising up, Arete silence broke,
Stretch’d out her snowy hand, and thus she spoke:

“What wondrous man heaven sends us in our guest;
Through all his woes the hero shines confess’d;
His comely port, his ample frame express
A manly air, majestic in distress.
He, as my guest, is my peculiar care:
You share the pleasure, then in bounty share
To worth in misery a reverence pay,
And with a generous hand reward his stay;
For since kind heaven with wealth our realm has bless’d,
Give it to heaven by aiding the distress’d.”

Then sage Echeneus, whose grave reverend brow
The hand of time had silvered o’er with snow,
Mature in wisdom rose: “Your words (he cries)
Demand obedience, for your words are wise.
But let our king direct the glorious way
To generous acts; our part is to obey.”

“While life informs these limbs (the king replied),
Well to deserve, be all my cares employed:
But here this night the royal guest detain,
Till the sun flames along the ethereal plain.
Be it my task to send with ample stores
The stranger from our hospitable shores:
Tread you my steps! ’Tis mine to lead the race,
The first in glory, as the first in place.”

To whom the prince: “This night with joy I stay
O monarch great in virtue as in sway!
If thou the circling year my stay control,
To raise a bounty noble as thy soul;
The circling year I wait, with ampler stores
And fitter pomp to hail my native shores:
Then by my realms due homage would be paid;
For wealthy kings are loyally obeyed!”

“O king! for such thou art, and sure thy blood
Through veins (he cried) of royal fathers flow’d:
Unlike those vagrants who on falsehood live,
Skill’d in smooth tales, and artful to deceive;
Thy better soul abhors the liar’s part,
Wise is thy voice, and noble is thy heart.
Thy words like music every breast control,
Steal through the ear, and win upon the soul;
Soft, as some song divine, thy story flows,
Nor better could the Muse record thy woes.

“But say, upon the dark and dismal coast,
Saw’st thou the worthies of the Grecian host?
The godlike leaders who, in battle slain,
Fell before Troy, and nobly press’d the plain?
And lo! a length of night behind remains,
The evening stars still mount the ethereal plains.
Thy tale with raptures I could hear thee tell,
Thy woes on earth, the wondrous scenes in hell,
Till in the vault of heaven the stars decay.
And the sky reddens with the rising day.”

“O worthy of the power the gods assign’d
(Ulysses thus replies), a king in mind:
Since yet the early hour of night allows
Time for discourse, and time for soft repose,
If scenes of misery can entertain,
Woes I unfold, of woes a dismal train.
Prepare to hear of murder and of blood;
Of godlike heroes who uninjured stood
Amidst a war of spears in foreign lands,
Yet bled at home, and bled by female hands.

“Now summon’d Proserpine to hell’s black hall
The heroine shades: they vanish’d at her call.
When lo! advanced the forms of heroes slain
By stern AEgysthus, a majestic train:
And, high above the rest Atrides press’d the plain.
He quaff’d the gore; and straight his soldier knew,
And from his eyes pour’d down the tender dew:
His arms he stretch’d; his arms the touch deceive,
Nor in the fond embrace, embraces give:
His substance vanish’d, and his strength decay’d,
Now all Atrides is an empty shade.

“Moved at the sight, I for a apace resign’d
To soft affliction all my manly mind;
At last with tears: ‘O what relentless doom,
Imperial phantom, bow’d thee to the tomb?
Say while the sea, and while the tempest raves,
Has Fate oppress’d thee in the roaring waves,
Or nobly seized thee in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms?’

“The ghost returns: ‘O chief of human kind
For active courage and a patient mind;
Nor while the sea, nor while the tempest raves
Has Fate oppress’d me on the roaring waves!
Nor nobly seized me in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms
Stabb’d by a murderous hand Atrides died,
A foul adulterer, and a faithless bride;
E’en in my mirth, and at the friendly feast,
O’er the full bowl, the traitor stabb’d his guest;
Thus by the gory arm of slaughter falls
The stately ox, and bleeds within the stalls.
But not with me the direful murder ends,
These, these expired! their crime, they were my friends:
Thick as the boars, which some luxurious lord
Kills for the feast, to crown the nuptial board.
When war has thunder’d with its loudest storms,
Death thou hast seen in all her ghastly forms:
In duel met her on the listed ground,
When hand to hand they wound return for wound;
But never have the eyes astonish’d view’d
So vile a deed, so dire a scene of blood.
E’en in the flow of joy, when now the bowl
Glows in our veins, and opens every soul,
We groan, we faint; with blood the doom is dyed.
And o’er the pavement floats the dreadful tide—
Her breast all gore, with lamentable cries,
The bleeding innocent Cassandra dies!
Then though pale death froze cold in every vein,
My sword I strive to wield, but strive in vain;
Nor did my traitress wife these eyelids close,
Or decently in death my limbs compose.
O woman, woman, when to ill thy mind
Is bent, all hell contains no fouler fiend:
And such was mine! who basely plunged her sword
Through the fond bosom where she reign’d adored!
Alas! I hoped the toils of war o’ercome,
To meet soft quiet and repose at home;
Delusive hope! O wife, thy deeds disgrace
The perjured sex, and blacken all the race;
And should posterity one virtuous find,
Name Clytemnestra, they will curse the kind.’

“Oh injured shade (I cried) what mighty woes
To thy imperial race from woman rose!
By woman here thou tread’st this mournful strand,
And Greece by woman lies a desert land.’

“‘Warn’d by my ills beware, (the shade replies,)
Nor trust the sex that is so rarely wise;
When earnest to explore thy secret breast,
Unfold some trifle, but conceal the rest.
But in thy consort cease to fear a foe,
For thee she feels sincerity of woe;
When Troy first bled beneath the Grecian arms,
She shone unrivall’d with a blaze of charms;
Thy infant son her fragrant bosom press’d,
Hung at her knee, or wanton’d at her breast;
But now the years a numerous train have ran;
The blooming boy is ripen’d into man;
Thy eyes shall see him burn with noble fire,
The sire shall bless his son, the son his sire;
But my Orestes never met these eyes,
Without one look the murder’d father dies;
Then from a wretched friend this wisdom learn,
E’en to thy queen disguised, unknown, return;
For since of womankind so few are just,
Think all are false, nor e’en the faithful trust.

“‘But, say, resides my son in royal port,
In rich Orchomenos, or Sparta’s court?
Or say in Pyle? for yet he views the light,
Nor glides a phantom through the realms of night.’

“Then I: ‘Thy suit is vain, nor can I say
If yet he breathes in realms of cheerful day;
Or pale or wan beholds these nether skies;
Truth I revere; for wisdom never lies.’

“Thus in a tide of tears our sorrows flow,
And add new horror to the realms of woe;
Till side by side along the dreary coast
Advanced Achilles’ and Patroclus’ ghost,
A friendly pair! near these the Pylian stray’d,
And towering Ajax, an illustrious shade!
War was his joy, and pleased with loud alarms,
None but Pelides brighter shone in arms.

“Through the thick gloom his friend Achilles knew,
And as he speaks the tears descend in dew.

“‘Comest thou alive to view the Stygian bounds,
Where the wan spectres walk eternal rounds;
Nor fear’st the dark and dismal waste to tread,
Throng’d with pale ghosts, familiar with the dead?’

“To whom with sighs: ‘I pass these dreadful gates
To seek the Theban, and consult the Fates;
For still, distress’d, I rove from coast to coast,
Lost to my friends, and to my country lost.
But sure the eye of Time beholds no name
So bless’d as thine in all the rolls of fame;
Alive we hail’d thee with our guardian gods,
And dead thou rulest a king in these abodes.’

“‘Talk not of ruling in this dolorous gloom,
Nor think vain words (he cried) can ease my doom.
Rather I’d choose laboriously to bear
A weight of woes, and breathe the vital air,
A slave to some poor hind that toils for bread,
Than reign the sceptred monarch of the dead.
But say, if in my steps my son proceeds,
And emulates his godlike father’s deeds?
If at the clash of arms, and shout of foes,
Swells his bold heart, his bosom nobly glows?
Say if my sire, the reverend Peleus, reigns,
Great in his Phthia, and his throne maintains;
Or, weak and old, my youthful arm demands,
To fix the sceptre steadfast in his hands?
O might the lamp of life rekindled burn,
And death release me from the silent urn!
This arm, that thunder’d o’er the Phrygian plain,
And swell’d the ground with mountains of the slain,
Should vindicate my injured father’s fame,
Crush the proud rebel, and assert his claim.’

“‘Illustrious shade (I cried), of Peleus’ fates
No circumstance the voice of Fame relates:
But hear with pleased attention the renown,
The wars and wisdom of thy gallant son.
With me from Scyros to the field of fame
Radiant in arms the blooming hero came.
When Greece assembled all her hundred states,
To ripen counsels, and decide debates,
Heavens! how he charm’d us with a flow of sense,
And won the heart with manly eloquence!
He first was seen of all the peers to rise,
The third in wisdom, where they all were wise!
But when, to try the fortune of the day,
Host moved toward host in terrible array,
Before the van, impatient for the fight,
With martial port he strode, and stern delight:
Heaps strew’d on heaps beneath his falchion groan’d,
And monuments of dead deform’d the ground.
The time would fail should I in order tell
What foes were vanquish’d, and what numbers fell:
How, lost through love, Eurypylus was slain,
And round him bled his bold Cetaean train.
To Troy no hero came of nobler line,
Or if of nobler, Memnon, it was thine.

“When Ilion in the horse received her doom,
And unseen armies ambush’d in its womb,
Greece gave her latent warriors to my care,
’Twas mine on Troy to pour the imprison’d war:
Then when the boldest bosom beat with fear,
When the stern eyes of heroes dropp’d a tear,
Fierce in his look his ardent valour glow’d,
Flush’d in his cheek, or sallied in his blood;
Indignant in the dark recess he stands,
Pants for the battle, and the war demands:
His voice breathed death, and with a martial air
He grasp’d his sword, and shook his glittering spear.
And when the gods our arms with conquest crown’d,
When Troy’s proud bulwarks smoked upon the ground,
Greece, to reward her soldier’s gallant toils,
Heap’d high his navy with unnumber’d spoils.

“Thus great in glory, from the din of war
Safe he return’d, without one hostile scar;
Though spears in iron tempests rain’d around,
Yet innocent they play’d, and guiltless of a wound.’

“While yet I spoke, the shade with transport glow’d,
Rose in his majesty, and nobler trod;
With haughty stalk he sought the distant glades
Of warrior kings, and join’d the illustrious shades.

“Now without number ghost by ghost arose,
All wailing with unutterable woes.
Alone, apart, in discontented mood,
A gloomy shade the sullen Ajax stood;
For ever sad, with proud disdain he pined,
And the lost arms for ever stung his mind;
Though to the contest Thetis gave the laws,
And Pallas, by the Trojans, judged the cause.
O why was I victorious in the strife?
O dear bought honour with so brave a life!
With him the strength of war, the soldier’s pride,
Our second hope to great Achilles, died!
Touch’d at the sight from tears I scarce refrain,
And tender sorrow thrills in every vein;
Pensive and sad I stand, at length accost
With accents mild the inexorable ghost:
‘Still burns thy rage? and can brave souls resent
E’en after death? Relent, great shade, relent!
Perish those arms which by the gods’ decree
Accursed our army with the loss of thee!
With thee we fall; Greece wept thy hapless fates,
And shook astonish’d through her hundred states;
Not more, when great Achilles press’d the ground,
And breathed his manly spirit through the wound.
O deem thy fall not owed to man’s decree,
Jove hated Greece, and punish’d Greece in thee!
Turn then; oh peaceful turn, thy wrath control,
And calm the raging tempest of thy soul.’

“While yet I speak, the shade disdains to stay,
In silence turns, and sullen stalks away.

“Touch’d at his sour retreat, through deepest night,
Through hell’s black bounds I had pursued his flight,
And forced the stubborn spectre to reply;
But wondrous visions drew my curious eye.
High on a throne, tremendous to behold,
Stern Minos waves a mace of burnish’d gold;
Around ten thousand thousand spectres stand
Through the wide dome of Dis, a trembling band
Still as they plead, the fatal lots he rolls,
Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.

“The huge Orion, of portentous size,
Swift through the gloom a giant-hunter flies:
A ponderous mace of brass with direful sway
Aloft he whirls, to crush the savage prey!
Stern beasts in trains that by his truncheon fell,
Now grisly forms, shoot o’er the lawns of hell.

“There Tityus large and long, in fetters bound,
O’erspreads nine acres of infernal ground;
Two ravenous vultures, furious for their food,
Scream o’er the fiend, and riot in his blood,
Incessant gore the liver in his breast,
The immortal liver grows, and gives the immortal feast.
For as o’er Panope’s enamell’d plains
Latona journey’d to the Pythian fanes,
With haughty love the audacious monster strove
To force the goddess, and to rival Jove.

“There Tantalus along the Stygian bounds
Pours out deep groans (with groans all hell resounds);
E’en in the circling floods refreshment craves,
And pines with thirst amidst a sea of waves;
When to the water he his lip applies,
Back from his lip the treacherous water flies.
Above, beneath, around his hapless head,
Trees of all kinds delicious fruitage spread;
There figs, sky-dyed, a purple hue disclose,
Green looks the olive, the pomegranate glows.
There dangling pears exalting scents unfold.
And yellow apples ripen into gold;
The fruit he strives to seize; but blasts arise,
Toss it on high, and whirl it to the skies.

“I turn’d my eye, and as I turn’d survey’d
A mournful vision! the Sisyphian shade;
With many a weary step, and many a groan,
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone;
The huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
Thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
Again the restless orb his toil renews,
Dust mounts in clouds, and sweat descends in dews.

“Now I the strength of Hercules behold,
A towering spectre of gigantic mould,
A shadowy form! for high in heaven’s abodes
Himself resides, a god among the gods;
There in the bright assemblies of the skies.
He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.
Here hovering ghosts, like fowl, his shade surround,
And clang their pinions with terrific sound;
Gloomy as night he stands, in act to throw
The aërial arrow from the twanging bow.
Around his breast a wondrous zone is roll’d,
Where woodland monsters grin in fretted gold;
There sullen lions sternly seem to roar,
The bear to growl to foam the tusky boar;
There war and havoc and destruction stood,
And vengeful murder red with human blood.
Thus terribly adorned the figures shine,
Inimitably wrought with skill divine.
The mighty good advanced with awful look,
And, turning his grim visage, sternly spoke:

“‘O exercise in grief! by arts refined;
O taught to bear the wrongs of base mankind!
Such, such was I! Still toss’d from care to care,
While in your world I drew the vital air!
E’en I, who from the Lord of Thunders rose,
Bore toils and dangers, and a weight of woes;
To a base monarch still a slave confined,
(The hardest bondage to a generous mind!)
Down to these worlds I trod the dismal way,
And dragg’d the three-mouth’d dog to upper day
E’en hell I conquer’d, through the friendly aid
Of Maia’s offspring, and the martial maid.

“Thus he, nor deign’d for our reply to stay,
But, turning, stalk’d with giant-strides away.

“Curious to view the kings of ancient days,
The mighty dead that live in endless praise,
Resolved I stand; and haply had survey’d
The godlike Theseus, and Pirithous’ shade;
But swarms of spectres rose from deepest hell,
With bloodless visage, and with hideous yell.
They scream, they shriek; and groans and dismal sounds
Stun my scared ears, and pierce hell’s utmost bounds.
No more my heart the dismal din sustains,
And my cold blood hangs shivering in my veins;
Lest Gorgon, rising from the infernal lakes,
With horrors arm’d, and curls of hissing snakes,
Should fix me stiffen’d at the monstrous sight,
A stony image, in eternal night!
Straight from the direful coast to purer air
I speed my flight, and to my mates repair.
My mates ascend the ship; they strike their oars;
The mountains lessen, and retreat the shores;
Swift o’er the waves we fly; the freshening gales
Sing through the shrouds, and stretch the swelling sails.”




BOOK XII.


ARGUMENT.
THE SIRENE, SCYLLA, AND CHARYBDIS.


He relates how, after his return from the shades, he was sent by Circe
on his voyage, by the coast of the Sirens, and by the strait of Scylla
and Charybdis: the manner in which he escaped those dangers: how, being
cast on the island Trinacria, his companions destroyed the oxen of the
Sun: the vengeance that followed; how all perished by shipwreck except
himself, who, swimming on the mast of the ship, arrived on the island
of Calypso. With which his narration concludes.


“Thus o’er the rolling surge the vessel flies,
Till from the waves the Ææan hills arise.
Here the gay Morn resides in radiant bowers,
Here keeps her revels with the dancing Hours;
Here Phœbus, rising in the ethereal way,
Through heaven’s bright portals pours the beamy day.
At once we fix our halsers on the land.
At once descend, and press the desert sand:
There, worn and wasted, lose our cares in sleep,
To the hoarse murmurs of the rolling deep.

“Soon as the morn restored the day, we paid
Sepulchral honours to Elpenor’s shade.
Now by the axe the rushing forest bends,
And the huge pile along the shore ascends.
Around we stand, a melancholy train,
And a loud groan re-echoes from the main.
Fierce o’er the pyre, by fanning breezes spread,
The hungry flames devour the silent dead.
A rising tomb, the silent dead to grace,
Fast by the roarings of the main we place;
The rising tomb a lofty column bore,
And high above it rose the tapering oar.

“Meantime the goddess our return survey’d
From the pale ghosts and hell’s tremendous shade.
Swift she descends: a train of nymphs divine
Bear the rich viands and the generous wine:
In act to speak the power of magic stands,
And graceful thus accosts the listening bands;

“‘O sons of woe? decreed by adverse fates
Alive to pass through hell’s eternal gates!
All, soon or late, are doom’d that path to tread;
More wretched you! twice number’d with the dead!
This day adjourn your cares, exalt your souls,
Indulge the taste, and drain the sparkling bowls;
And when the morn unveils her saffron ray,
Spread your broad sails, and plough the liquid way:
Lo, I this night, your faithful guide, explain
Your woes by land, your dangers on the main.’

“The goddess spoke. In feasts we waste the day,
Till Phœbus downward plunged his burning ray;
Then sable night ascends, and balmy rest
Seals every eye, and calms the troubled breast.
Then curious she commands me to relate
The dreadful scenes of Pluto’s dreary state.
She sat in silence while the tale I tell,
The wondrous visions and the laws of hell.

“Then thus: ‘The lot of man the gods dispose;
These ills are past: now hear thy future woes
O prince attend; some favouring power be kind,
And print the important story on thy mind!

“‘Next, where the Sirens dwell, you plough the seas;
Their song is death, and makes destruction please.
Unblest the man, whom music wins to stay
Nigh the cursed shore and listen to the lay.
No more that wretch shall view the joys of life
His blooming offspring, or his beauteous wife!
In verdant meads they sport; and wide around
Lie human bones that whiten all the ground:
The ground polluted floats with human gore,
And human carnage taints the dreadful shore
Fly swift the dangerous coast: let every ear
Be stopp’d against the song! ’tis death to hear!
Firm to the mast with chains thyself be bound,
Nor trust thy virtue to the enchanting sound.
If, mad with transport, freedom thou demand,
Be every fetter strain’d, and added band to band.

“‘These seas o’erpass’d, be wise! but I refrain
To mark distinct thy voyage o’er the main:
New horrors rise! let prudence be thy guide,
And guard thy various passage through the tide.

“‘High o’er the main two rocks exalt their brow,’
The boiling billows thundering roll below;
Through the vast waves the dreadful wonders move,
Hence named Erratic by the gods above.
No bird of air, no dove of swiftest wing,
That bears ambrosia to the ethereal king,
Shuns the dire rocks: in vain she cuts the skies;
The dire rocks meet, and crush her as she flies:
Not the fleet bark, when prosperous breezes play,
Ploughs o’er that roaring surge its desperate way;
O’erwhelm’d it sinks: while round a smoke expires,
And the waves flashing seem to burn with fires.
Scarce the famed Argo pass’d these raging floods,
The sacred Argo, fill’d with demigods!
E’en she had sunk, but Jove’s imperial bride
Wing’d her fleet sail, and push’d her o’er the tide.

“‘High in the air the rock its summit shrouds
In brooding tempests, and in rolling clouds;
Loud storms around, and mists eternal rise,
Beat its bleak brow, and intercept the skies.
When all the broad expansion, bright with day,
Glows with the autumnal or the summer ray,
The summer and the autumn glow in vain,
The sky for ever lowers, for ever clouds remain.
Impervious to the step of man it stands,
Though borne by twenty feet, though arm’d with twenty hands;
Smooth as the polish of the mirror rise
The slippery sides, and shoot into the skies.
Full in the centre of this rock display’d,
A yawning cavern casts a dreadful shade:
Nor the fleet arrow from the twanging bow,
Sent with full force, could reach the depth below.
Wide to the west the horrid gulf extends,
And the dire passage down to hell descends.
O fly the dreadful sight! expand thy sails,
Ply the strong oar, and catch the nimble gales;
Here Scylla bellows from the dire abodes,
Tremendous pest, abhorr’d by man and gods!
Hideous her voice, and with less terrors roar
The whelps of lions in the midnight hour.
Twelve feet, deform’d and foul, the fiend dispreads;
Six horrid necks she rears, and six terrific heads;
Her jaws grin dreadful with three rows of teeth;
Jaggy they stand, the gaping den of death;
Her parts obscene the raging billows hide;
Her bosom terribly o’erlooks the tide.
When stung with hunger she embroils the flood,
The sea-dog and the dolphin are her food;
She makes the huge leviathan her prey,
And all the monsters of the watery way;
The swiftest racer of the azure plain
Here fills her sails, and spreads her oars in vain;
Fell Scylla rises, in her fury roars,
At once six mouths expands, at once six men devours.

“‘Close by, a rock of less enormous height
Breaks the wild waves, and forms a dangerous strait;
Full on its crown a fig’s green branches rise,
And shoot a leafy forest to the skies;
Beneath, Charybdis holds her boisterous reign
’Midst roaring whirlpools, and absorbs the main;
Thrice in her gulfs the boiling seas subside,
Thrice in dire thunders she refunds the tide.
Oh, if thy vessel plough the direful waves,
When seas retreating roar within her caves,
Ye perish all! though he who rules the main
Lends his strong aid, his aid he lends in vain.
Ah, shun the horrid gulf! by Scylla fly.
’Tis better six to lose, than all to die.’

“I then: ‘O nymph propitious to my prayer,
Goddess divine, my guardian power, declare,
Is the foul fiend from human vengeance freed?
Or, if I rise in arms, can Scylla bleed?’

“Then she: ‘O worn by toils, O broke in fight,
Still are new toils and war thy dire delight?
Will martial flames for ever fire thy mind,
And never, never be to Heaven resign’d?
How vain thy efforts to avenge the wrong!
Deathless the pest! impenetrably strong!
Furious and fell, tremendous to behold!
E’en with a look she withers all the bold!
She mocks the weak attempts of human might;
Oh, fly her rage! thy conquest is thy flight.
If but to seize thy arms thou make delay,
Again thy fury vindicates her prey;
Her six mouths yawn, and six are snatch’d away.
From her foul wound Crataeis gave to air
This dreadful pest! To her direct thy prayer,
To curb the monster in her dire abodes,
And guard thee through the tumult of the floods.
Thence to Trinacria’s shore you bend your way,
Where graze thy herds, illustrious source of day!
Seven herds, seven flocks enrich the sacred plains,
Each herd, each flock full fifty heads contains;
The wondrous kind a length of age survey,
By breed increase not, nor by death decay.
Two sister goddesses possess the plain,
The constant guardian of the woolly train;
Lampetie fair, and Phaethusa young,
From Phœbus and the bright Neæra sprung;
Here, watchful o’er the flocks, in shady bowers
And flowery meads, they waste the joyous hours.
Rob not the gods! and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails;
But if thy impious hands the flocks destroy,
The gods, the gods avenge it, and ye die!
’Tis thine alone (thy friends and navy lost)
Through tedious toils to view thy native coast.’

She ceased: and now arose the morning ray;
Swift to her dome the goddess held her way.
Then to my mates I measured back the plain,
Climb’d the tall bark, and rush’d into the main;
Then, bending to the stroke, their oars they drew
To their broad breasts, and swift the galley flew.
Up sprung a brisker breeze; with freshening gales
The friendly goddess stretch’d the swelling sails;
We drop our oars; at ease the pilot guides;
The vessel light along the level glides.
When, rising sad and slow, with pensive look,
Thus to the melancholy train I spoke:

“‘O friends, oh ever partners of my woes,
Attend while I what Heaven foredooms disclose.
Hear all! Fate hangs o’er all; on you it lies
To live or perish! to be safe, be wise!

“‘In flowery meads the sportive Sirens play,
Touch the soft lyre, and tune the vocal lay;
Me, me alone, with fetters firmly bound,
The gods allow to hear the dangerous sound.
Hear and obey; if freedom I demand,
Be every fetter strain’d, be added band to band.’

“While yet I speak the winged galley flies,
And lo! the Siren shores like mists arise.
Sunk were at once the winds; the air above,
And waves below, at once forgot to move;
Some demon calm’d the air and smooth’d the deep,
Hush’d the loud winds, and charm’d the waves to sleep.
Now every sail we furl, each oar we ply;
Lash’d by the stroke, the frothy waters fly.
The ductile wax with busy hands I mould,
And cleft in fragments, and the fragments roll’d;
The aërial region now grew warm with day,
The wax dissolved beneath the burning ray;
Then every ear I barr’d against the strain,
And from access of frenzy lock’d the brain.
Now round the masts my mates the fetters roll’d,
And bound me limb by limb with fold on fold.
Then bending to the stroke, the active train
Plunge all at once their oars, and cleave the main.

“While to the shore the rapid vessel flies,
Our swift approach the Siren choir descries;
Celestial music warbles from their tongue,
And thus the sweet deluders tune the song:

“‘Oh stay, O pride of Greece! Ulysses, stay!
Oh cease thy course, and listen to our lay!
Blest is the man ordain’d our voice to hear,
The song instructs the soul, and charms the ear.
Approach! thy soul shall into raptures rise!
Approach! and learn new wisdom from the wise!
We know whate’er the kings of mighty name
Achieved at Ilion in the field of fame;
Whate’er beneath the sun’s bright journey lies.
Oh stay, and learn new wisdom from the wise!’

“Thus the sweet charmers warbled o’er the main;
My soul takes wing to meet the heavenly strain;
I give the sign, and struggle to be free;
Swift row my mates, and shoot along the sea;
New chains they add, and rapid urge the way,
Till, dying off, the distant sounds decay;
Then scudding swiftly from the dangerous ground,
The deafen’d ear unlock’d, the chains unbound.

“Now all at once tremendous scenes unfold;
Thunder’d the deeps, the smoky billows roll’d!
Tumultuous waves embroil the bellowing flood,
All trembling, deafen’d, and aghast we stood!
No more the vessel plough’d the dreadful wave,
Fear seized the mighty, and unnerved the brave;
Each dropp’d his oar; but swift from man to man
With looks serene I turn’d, and thus began:
‘O friends! O often tried in adverse storms!
With ills familiar in more dreadful forms!
Deep in the dire Cyclopean den you lay,
Yet safe return’d—Ulysses led the way.
Learn courage hence, and in my care confide;
Lo! still the same Ulysses is your guide.
Attend my words! your oars incessant ply;
Strain every nerve, and bid the vessel fly.
If from yon jostling rocks and wavy war
Jove safety grants, he grants it to your care.
And thou, whose guiding hand directs our way,
Pilot, attentive listen and obey!
Bear wide thy course, nor plough those angry waves
Where rolls yon smoke, yon tumbling ocean raves;
Steer by the higher rock; lest whirl’d around
We sink, beneath the circling eddy drown’d.’
While yet I speak, at once their oars they seize,
Stretch to the stroke, and brush the working seas.
Cautious the name of Scylla I suppress’d;
That dreadful sound had chill’d the boldest breast.

“Meantime, forgetful of the voice divine,
All dreadful bright my limbs in armour shine;
High on the deck I take my dangerous stand,
Two glittering javelins lighten in my hand;
Prepared to whirl the whizzing spear I stay,
Till the fell fiend arise to seize her prey.
Around the dungeon, studious to behold
The hideous pest, my labouring eyes I roll’d;
In vain! the dismal dungeon, dark as night,
Veils the dire monster, and confounds the sight.

“Now through the rocks, appall’d with deep dismay,
We bend our course, and stem the desperate way;
Dire Scylla there a scene of horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the deep with storms.
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves,
The rough rock roars, tumultuous boil the waves;
They toss, they foam, a wild confusion raise,
Like waters bubbling o’er the fiery blaze;
Eternal mists obscure the aërial plain,
And high above the rock she spouts the main;
When in her gulfs the rushing sea subsides,
She drains the ocean with the refluent tides;
The rock re-bellows with a thundering sound;
Deep, wondrous deep, below appears the ground.

“Struck with despair, with trembling hearts we view’d
The yawning dungeon, and the tumbling flood;
When lo! fierce Scylla stoop’d to seize her prey,
Stretch’d her dire jaws, and swept six men away.
Chiefs of renown! loud-echoing shrieks arise;
I turn, and view them quivering in the skies;
They call, and aid with outstretch’d arms implore;
In vain they call! those arms are stretch’d no more.
As from some rock that overhangs the flood
The silent fisher casts the insidious food,
With fraudful care he waits the finny prize,
And sudden lifts it quivering to the skies:
So the foul monster lifts her prey on high,
So pant the wretches struggling in the sky;
In the wide dungeon she devours her food,
And the flesh trembles while she churns the blood.
Worn as I am with griefs, with care decay’d,
Never, I never scene so dire survey’d!
My shivering blood, congeal’d, forgot to flow;
Aghast I stood, a monument of woe!

“Now from the rocks the rapid vessel flies,
And the hoarse din like distant thunder dies;
To Sol’s bright isle our voyage we pursue,
And now the glittering mountains rise to view.
There, sacred to the radiant god of day,
Graze the fair herds, the flocks promiscuous stray:
Then suddenly was heard along the main
To low the ox, to bleat the woolly train.
Straight to my anxious thoughts the sound convey’d
The words of Circe and the Theban shade;
Warn’d by their awful voice these shores to shun,
With cautious fears oppress’d I thus begun:

“‘O friends! O ever exercised in care!
Hear Heaven’s commands, and reverence what ye hear!
To fly these shores the prescient Theban shade
And Circe warn! Oh be their voice obey’d;
Some mighty woe relentless Heaven forebodes:
Fly these dire regions, and revere the gods!’

“While yet I spoke, a sudden sorrow ran
Through every breast, and spread from man to man,
Till wrathful thus Eurylochus began:

“‘O cruel thou! some Fury sure has steel’d
That stubborn soul, by toil untaught to yield!
From sleep debarr’d, we sink from woes to woes:
And cruel, enviest thou a short repose?
Still must we restless rove, new seas explore,
The sun descending, and so near the shore?
And lo! the night begins her gloomy reign,
And doubles all the terrors of the main:
Oft in the dead of night loud winds arise,
Lash the wild surge, and bluster in the skies.
Oh, should the fierce south-west his rage display,
And toss with rising storms the watery way,
Though gods descend from heaven’s aërial plain
To lend us aid, the gods descend in vain.
Then while the night displays her awful shade,
Sweet time of slumber! be the night obey’d!
Haste ye to land! and when the morning ray
Sheds her bright beam, pursue the destined way.’
A sudden joy in every bosom rose:
So will’d some demon, minister of woes!

“To whom with grief: ‘O swift to be undone!
Constrain’d I act what wisdom bids me shun.
But yonder herbs and yonder flocks forbear;
Attest the heavens, and call the gods to hear:
Content, an innocent repast display,
By Circe given, and fly the dangerous prey.’

“Thus I: and while to shore the vessel flies,
With hands uplifted they attest the skies:
Then, where a fountain’s gurgling waters play,
They rush to land, and end in feasts the day:
They feed; they quaff; and now (their hunger fled)
Sigh for their friends devour’d, and mourn the dead;
Nor cease the tears till each in slumber shares
A sweet forgetfulness of human cares.
Now far the night advanced her gloomy reign,
And setting stars roll’d down the azure plain:
When at the voice of Jove wild whirlwinds rise,
And clouds and double darkness veil the skies;
The moon, the stars, the bright ethereal host
Seem as extinct, and all their splendours lost:
The furious tempest roars with dreadful sound:
Air thunders, rolls the ocean, groans the ground.
All night it raged: when morning rose to land
We haul’d our bark, and moor’d it on the strand,
Where in a beauteous grotto’s cool recess
Dance the green Nereids of the neighbouring seas.

“There while the wild winds whistled o’er the main,
Thus careful I address’d the listening train:

“‘O friends, be wise! nor dare the flocks destroy
Of these fair pastures: if ye touch, ye die.
Warn’d by the high command of Heaven, be awed:
Holy the flocks, and dreadful is the god!
That god who spreads the radiant beams of light,
And views wide earth and heaven’s unmeasured height.’

“And now the moon had run her monthly round,
The south-east blustering with a dreadful sound:
Unhurt the beeves, untouch’d the woolly train,
Low through the grove, or touch the flowery plain:
Then fail’d our food: then fish we make our prey,
Or fowl that screaming haunt the watery way.
Till now from sea or flood no succour found,
Famine and meagre want besieged us round.
Pensive and pale from grove to grove I stray’d,
From the loud storms to find a sylvan shade;
There o’er my hands the living wave I pour;
And Heaven and Heaven’s immortal thrones implore,
To calm the roarings of the stormy main,
And guide me peaceful to my realms again.
Then o’er my eyes the gods soft slumbers shed,
While thus Eurylochus arising said:

“‘O friends, a thousand ways frail mortals lead
To the cold tomb, and dreadful all to tread;
But dreadful most, when by a slow decay
Pale hunger wastes the manly strength away.
Why cease ye then to implore the powers above,
And offer hecatombs to thundering Jove?
Why seize ye not yon beeves, and fleecy prey?
Arise unanimous; arise and slay!
And if the gods ordain a safe return,
To Phœbus shrines shall rise, and altars burn.
But should the powers that o’er mankind preside
Decree to plunge us in the whelming tide,
Better to rush at once to shades below
Than linger life away, and nourish woe.’

“Thus he: the beeves around securely stray,
When swift to ruin they invade the prey;
They seize, they kill!—but for the rite divine.
The barley fail’d, and for libations wine.
Swift from the oak they strip the shady pride;
And verdant leaves the flowery cake supplied.

“With prayer they now address the ethereal train,
Slay the selected beeves, and flay the slain;
The thighs, with fat involved, divide with art,
Strew’d o’er with morsels cut from every part.
Water, instead of wine, is brought in urns,
And pour’d profanely as the victim burns.
The thighs thus offer’d, and the entrails dress’d,
They roast the fragments, and prepare the feast.

“‘Twas then soft slumber fled my troubled brain;
Back to the bark I speed along the main.
When lo! an odour from the feast exhales,
Spreads o’er the coast and scents the tainted gales;
A chilly fear congeal’d my vital blood,
And thus, obtesting Heaven, I mourn’d aloud;

“‘O sire of men and gods, immortal Jove!
O all ye blissful powers that reign above!
Why were my cares beguiled in short repose?
O fatal slumber, paid with lasting woes!
A deed so dreadful all the gods alarms,
Vengeance is on the wing, and Heaven in arms!’

“Meantime Lampetie mounts the aërial way,
And kindles into rage the god of day;

“‘Vengeance, ye powers (he cries), and then whose hand
Aims the red bolt, and hurls the writhen brand!
Slain are those herds which I with pride survey,
When through the ports of heaven I pour the day,
Or deep in ocean plunge the burning ray.
Vengeance, ye gods! or I the skies forego,
And bear the lamp of heaven to shades below.’

“To whom the thundering Power: ‘O source of day
Whose radiant lamp adorns the azure way,
Still may thy beams through heaven’s bright portal rise,
The joy of earth, the glory of the skies:
Lo! my red arm I bare, my thunders guide,
To dash the offenders in the whelming tide.’

“To fair Calypso, from the bright abodes,
Hermes convey’d these counsels of the gods.

“Meantime from man to man my tongue exclaims,
My wrath is kindled, and my soul in flames.
In vain! I view perform’d the direful deed,
Beeves, slain in heaps, along the ocean bleed.

“Now heaven gave signs of wrath: along the ground
Crept the raw hides, and with a bellowing sound
Roar’d the dead limbs; the burning entrails groan’d.
Six guilty days my wretched mates employ
In impious feasting, and unhallowed joy;
The seventh arose, and now the sire of gods
Rein’d the rough storms; and calm’d the tossing floods:
With speed the bark we climb; the spacious sails.
Loosed from the yards invite the impelling gales.
Past sight of shore, along the surge we bound,
And all above is sky, and ocean all around;
When lo! a murky cloud the thunderer forms
Full o’er our heads, and blackens heaven with storms.
Night dwells o’er all the deep: and now outflies
The gloomy west, and whistles in the skies.
The mountain-billows roar! the furious blast
Howls o’er the shroud, and rends it from the mast:
The mast gives way, and, crackling as it bends,
Tears up the deck; then all at once descends:
The pilot by the tumbling ruin slain,
Dash’d from the helm, falls headlong in the main.
Then Jove in anger bids his thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole:
Fierce at our heads his deadly bolt he aims,
Red with uncommon wrath, and wrapp’d in flames:
Full on the bark it fell; now high, now low,
Toss’d and retoss’d, it reel’d beneath the blow;
At once into the main the crew it shook:
Sulphurous odours rose, and smouldering smoke.
Like fowl that haunt the floods, they sink, they rise,
Now lost, now seen, with shrieks and dreadful cries;
And strive to gain the bark, but Jove denies.
Firm at the helm I stand, when fierce the main
Rush’d with dire noise, and dash’d the sides in twain;
Again impetuous drove the furious blast,
Snapp’d the strong helm, and bore to sea the mast.
Firm to the mast with cords the helm I bind,
And ride aloft, to Providence resign’d,
Through tumbling billows and a war of wind.
“Now sunk the west, and now a southern breeze,
More dreadful than the tempest lash’d the seas;
For on the rocks it bore where Scylla raves,
And dire Charybdis rolls her thundering waves.
All night I drove; and at the dawn of day,
Fast by the rocks beheld the desperate way;
Just when the sea within her gulfs subsides,
And in the roaring whirlpools rush the tides,
Swift from the float I vaulted with a bound,
The lofty fig-tree seized, and clung around;
So to the beam the bat tenacious clings,
And pendent round it clasps his leather wings.
High in the air the tree its boughs display’d,
And o’er the dungeon cast a dreadful shade;
All unsustain’d between the wave and sky,
Beneath my feet the whirling billows fly.
What time the judge forsakes the noisy bar
To take repast, and stills the wordy war,
Charybdis, rumbling from her inmost caves,
The mast refunded on her refluent waves.
Swift from the tree, the floating mass to gain,
Sudden I dropp’d amidst the flashing main;
Once more undaunted on the ruin rode,
And oar’d with labouring arms along the flood.
Unseen I pass’d by Scylla’s dire abodes.
So Jove decreed (dread sire of men and gods).
Then nine long days I plow’d the calmer seas,
Heaved by the surge, and wafted by the breeze.
Weary and wet the Ogygian shores I gain,
When the tenth sun descended to the main.
There, in Calypso’s ever-fragrant bowers,
Refresh’d I lay, and joy beguiled the hours.
“My following fates to thee, O king, are known,
And the bright partner of thy royal throne.
Enough: in misery can words avail?
And what so tedious as a twice-told tale?”




BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.
THE ARRIVAL OF ULYSSES IN ITHACA.


Ulysses takes his leave of Alcinous and Arete, and embarks in the
evening. Next morning the ship arrives at Ithaca; where the sailors, as
Ulysses is yet sleeping, lay him on the shore with all his treasures.
On their return, Neptune changes their ship into a rock. In the
meantime Ulysses, awaking, knows not his native Ithaca, by reason of a
mist which Pallas had cast around him. He breaks into loud
lamentations; till the goddess appearing to him in the form of a
shepherd, discovers the country to him, and points out the particular
places. He then tells a feigned story of his adventures, upon which she
manifests herself, and they consult together of the measures to be
taken to destroy the suitors. To conceal his return, and disguise his
person the more effectually, she changes him into the figure of an old
beggar.


He ceased; but left so pleasing on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem’d to hear.
A pause of silence hush’d the shady rooms:
The grateful conference then the king resumes:

“Whatever toils the great Ulysses pass’d,
Beneath this happy roof they end at last;
No longer now from shore to shore to roam,
Smooth seas and gentle winds invite him home.
But hear me, princes! whom these walls inclose,
For whom my chanter sings: and goblet flows
With wine unmix’d (an honour due to age,
To cheer the grave, and warm the poet’s rage);
Though labour’d gold and many a dazzling vest
Lie heap’d already for our godlike guest;
Without new treasures let him not remove,
Large, and expressive of the public love:
Each peer a tripod, each a vase bestow,
A general tribute, which the state shall owe.”

This sentence pleased: then all their steps address’d
To separate mansions, and retired to rest.

Now did the rosy-finger’d morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies.
Down to the haven and the ships in haste
They bore the treasures, and in safety placed.
The king himself the vases ranged with care;
Then bade his followers to the feast prepare.
A victim ox beneath the sacred hand
Of great Alcinous falls, and stains the sand.
To Jove the Eternal (power above all powers!
Who wings the winds, and darkens heaven with showers)
The flames ascend: till evening they prolong
The rites, more sacred made by heavenly song;
For in the midst, with public honours graced,
Thy lyre divine, Demodocus! was placed.
All, but Ulysses, heard with fix’d delight;
He sate, and eyed the sun, and wish’d the night;
Slow seem’d the sun to move, the hours to roll,
His native home deep-imaged in his soul.
As the tired ploughman, spent with stubborn toil,
Whose oxen long have torn the furrow’d soil,
Sees with delight the sun’s declining ray,
When home with feeble knees he bends his way
To late repast (the day’s hard labour done);
So to Ulysses welcome set the sun;
Then instant to Alcinous and the rest
(The Scherian states) he turn’d, and thus address’d:

“O thou, the first in merit and command!
And you the peers and princes of the land!
May every joy be yours! nor this the least,
When due libation shall have crown’d the feast,
Safe to my home to send your happy guest.
Complete are now the bounties you have given,
Be all those bounties but confirm’d by Heaven!
So may I find, when all my wanderings cease,
My consort blameless, and my friends in peace.
On you be every bliss; and every day,
In home-felt joys, delighted roll away;
Yourselves, your wives, your long-descending race,
May every god enrich with every grace!
Sure fix’d on virtue may your nation stand,
And public evil never touch the land!”

His words well weigh’d, the general voice approved
Benign, and instant his dismission moved,
The monarch to Pontonus gave the sign.
To fill the goblet high with rosy wine;
“Great Jove the Father first (he cried) implore;
Then send the stranger to his native shore.”

The luscious wine the obedient herald brought;
Around the mansion flow’d the purple draught;
Each from his seat to each immortal pours,
Whom glory circles in the Olympian bowers
Ulysses sole with air majestic stands,
The bowl presenting to Arete’s hands;
Then thus: “O queen, farewell! be still possess’d
Of dear remembrance, blessing still and bless’d!
Till age and death shall gently call thee hence,
(Sure fate of every mortal excellence!)
Farewell! and joys successive ever spring
To thee, to thine, the people, and the king!”

Thus he: then parting prints the sandy shore
To the fair port: a herald march’d before,
Sent by Alcinous; of Arete’s train
Three chosen maids attend him to the main;
This does a tunic and white vest convey,
A various casket that, of rich inlay,
And bread and wine the third. The cheerful mates
Safe in the hollow poop dispose the cates;
Upon the deck soft painted robes they spread
With linen cover’d, for the hero’s bed.
He climbed the lofty stern; then gently press’d
The swelling couch, and lay composed to rest.

Now placed in order, the Phæacian train
Their cables loose, and launch into the main;
At once they bend, and strike their equal oars,
And leave the sinking hills and lessening shores.
While on the deck the chief in silence lies,
And pleasing slumbers steal upon his eyes.
As fiery coursers in the rapid race
Urged by fierce drivers through the dusty space,
Toss their high heads, and scour along the plain,
So mounts the bounding vessel o’er the main.
Back to the stern the parted billows flow,
And the black ocean foams and roars below.

Thus with spread sails the winged galley flies;
Less swift an eagle cuts the liquid skies;
Divine Ulysses was her sacred load,
A man, in wisdom equal to a god!
Much danger, long and mighty toils he bore,
In storms by sea, and combats on the shore;
All which soft sleep now banish’d from his breast,
Wrapp’d in a pleasing, deep, and death-like rest.

But when the morning-star with early ray
Flamed in the front of heaven, and promised day;
Like distant clouds the mariner descries
Fair Ithaca’s emerging hills arise.
Far from the town a spacious port appears,
Sacred to Phorcys’ power, whose name it bears;
Two craggy rocks projecting to the main,
The roaring wind’s tempestuous rage restrain;
Within the waves in softer murmurs glide,
And ships secure without their halsers ride.
High at the head a branching olive grows,
And crowns the pointed cliffs with shady boughs.
Beneath, a gloomy grotto’s cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas,
Where bowls and urns were form’d of living stone,
And massy beams in native marble shone,
On which the labours of the nymphs were roll’d,
Their webs divine of purple mix’d with gold.
Within the cave the clustering bees attend
Their waxen works, or from the roof depend.
Perpetual waters o’er the pavement glide;
Two marble doors unfold on either side;
Sacred the south, by which the gods descend;
But mortals enter at the northern end.

Thither they bent, and haul’d their ship to land
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand).
Ulysses sleeping on his couch they bore,
And gently placed him on the rocky shore.
His treasures next, Alcinous’ gifts, they laid
In the wild olive’s unfrequented shade,
Secure from theft; then launch’d the bark again,
Resumed their oars, and measured back the main,
Nor yet forgot old Ocean’s dread supreme,
The vengeance vow’d for eyeless Polypheme.
Before the throne of mighty Jove he stood,
And sought the secret counsels of the god.

“Shall then no more, O sire of gods! be mine
The rights and honours of a power divine?
Scorn’d e’en by man, and (oh severe disgrace!)
By soft Phæacians, my degenerate race!
Against yon destined head in vain I swore,
And menaced vengeance, ere he reach’d his shore;
To reach his natal shore was thy decree;
Mild I obey’d, for who shall war with thee?
Behold him landed, careless and asleep,
From all the eluded dangers of the deep;
Lo where he lies, amidst a shining store
Of brass, rich garments, and refulgent ore;
And bears triumphant to his native isle
A prize more worth than Ilion’s noble spoil.”

To whom the Father of the immortal powers,
Who swells the clouds, and gladdens earth with showers,
“Can mighty Neptune thus of man complain?
Neptune, tremendous o’er the boundless main!
Revered and awful e’en in heaven’s abodes,
Ancient and great! a god above the gods!
If that low race offend thy power divine
(Weak, daring creatures!) is not vengeance thine?
Go, then, the guilty at thy will chastise.”
He said. The shaker of the earth replies:

“This then, I doom: to fix the gallant ship,
A mark of vengeance on the sable deep;
To warn the thoughtless, self-confiding train,
No more unlicensed thus to brave the main.
Full in their port a Shady hill shall rise,
If such thy will.”—“We will it (Jove replies).
E’en when with transport blackening all the strand,
The swarming people hail their ship to land,
Fix her for ever, a memorial stone:
Still let her seem to sail, and seem alone.
The trembling crowds shall see the sudden shade
Of whelming mountains overhang their head!”

With that the god whose earthquakes rock the ground
Fierce to Phæacia cross’d the vast profound.
Swift as a swallow sweeps the liquid way,
The winged pinnace shot along the sea.
The god arrests her with a sudden stroke,
And roots her down an everlasting rock.
Aghast the Scherians stand in deep surprise;
All press to speak, all question with their eyes.
What hands unseen the rapid bark restrain!
And yet it swims, or seems to swim, the main!
Thus they, unconscious of the deed divine;
Till great Alcinous, rising, own’d the sign.

“Behold the long predestined day! (he cries;)
O certain faith of ancient prophecies
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How, moved with wrath, that careless we convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
Stern Neptune raged; and how by his command
Firm rooted in the surge a ship should stand
(A monument of wrath); and mound on mound
Should hide our walls, or whelm beneath the ground.

“The Fates have follow’d as declared the seer.
Be humbled, nations! and your monarch hear.
No more unlicensed brave the deeps, no more
With every stranger pass from shore to shore;
On angry Neptune now for mercy call;
To his high name let twelve black oxen fall.
So may the god reverse his purposed will,
Nor o’er our city hang the dreadful hill.”

The monarch spoke: they trembled and obey’d,
Forth on the sands the victim oxen led;
The gathered tribes before the altars stand,
And chiefs and rulers, a majestic band.
The king of ocean all the tribes implore;
The blazing altars redden all the shore.

Meanwhile Ulysses in his country lay,
Released from sleep, and round him might survey
The solitary shore and rolling sea.
Yet had his mind through tedious absence lost
The dear resemblance of his native coast;
Besides, Minerva, to secure her care,
Diffused around a veil of thickened air;
For so the gods ordain’d to keep unseen
His royal person from his friends and queen;
Till the proud suitors for their crimes afford
An ample vengeance to their injured lord.

Now all the land another prospect bore,
Another port appear’d, another shore.
And long-continued ways, and winding floods,
And unknown mountains, crown’d with unknown woods
Pensive and slow, with sudden grief oppress’d,
The king arose, and beat his careful breast,
Cast a long look o’er all the coast and main,
And sought, around, his native realm in vain;
Then with erected eyes stood fix’d in woe,
And as he spoke, the tears began to flow.

“Ye gods (he cried), upon what barren coast,
In what new region, is Ulysses toss’d?
Possess’d by wild barbarians, fierce in arms?
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Where shall this treasure now in safely lie?
And whither, whither its sad owner fly?
Ah, why did I Alcinous’ grace implore?
Ah, why forsake Phæacia’s happy shore?
Some juster prince perhaps had entertain’d,
And safe restored me to my native land.
Is this the promised, long-expected coast,
And this the faith Phæacia’s rulers boast?
O righteous gods! of all the great, how few
Are just to Heaven, and to their promise true!
But he, the power to whose all-seeing eyes
The deeds of men appear without disguise,
’Tis his alone to avenge the wrongs I bear;
For still the oppress’d are his peculiar care.
To count these presents, and from thence to prove,
Their faith is mine; the rest belongs to Jove.”

Then on the sands he ranged his wealthy store,
The gold, the vests, the tripods number’d o’er:
All these he found, but still in error lost,
Disconsolate he wanders on the coast,
Sighs for his country, and laments again
To the deaf rocks, and hoarse-resounding main.
When lo! the guardian goddess of the wise,
Celestial Pallas, stood before his eyes;
In show a youthful swain, of form divine,
Who seem’d descended from some princely line.
A graceful robe her slender body dress’d;
Around her shoulders flew the waving vest;
Her decent hand a shining javelin bore,
And painted sandals on her feet she wore.
To whom the king: “Whoe’er of human race
Thou art, that wanderest in this desert place,
With joy to thee, as to some god I bend,
To thee my treasures and myself commend.
O tell a wretch in exile doom’d to stray,
What air I breathe, what country I survey?
The fruitful continent’s extremest bound,
Or some fair isle which Neptune’s arms surround?

“From what far clime (said she) remote from fame
Arrivest thou here, a stranger to our name?
Thou seest an island, not to those unknown
Whose hills are brighten’d by the rising sun,
Nor those that placed beneath his utmost reign
Behold him sinking in the western main.
The rugged soil allows no level space
For flying chariots, or the rapid race;
Yet, not ungrateful to the peasant’s pain,
Suffices fulness to the swelling grain;
The loaded trees their various fruits produce,
And clustering grapes afford a generous juice;
Woods crown our mountains, and in every grove
The bounding goats and frisking heifers rove;
Soft rains and kindly dews refresh the field,
And rising springs eternal verdure yield.
E’en to those shores is Ithaca renown’d,
Where Troy’s majestic ruins strew the ground.”

At this, the chief with transport was possess’d;
His panting heart exulted in his breast;
Yet, well dissembling his untimely joys,
And veiling truth in plausible disguise,
Thus, with an air sincere, in fiction bold,
His ready tale the inventive hero told:

“Oft have I heard in Crete this island’s name;
For ’twas from Crete, my native soil, I came,
Self-banished thence. I sail’d before the wind,
And left my children and my friends behind.
From fierce Idomeneus’ revenge I flew,
Whose son, the swift Orsilochus, I slew
(With brutal force he seized my Trojan prey,
Due to the toils of many a bloody day).
Unseen I ’scaped, and favour’d by the night,
In a Phoenician vessel took my flight,
For Pyle or Elis bound; but tempests toss’d
And raging billows drove us on your coast.
In dead of night an unknown port we gain’d;
Spent with fatigue, and slept secure on land.
But ere the rosy morn renew’d the day,
While in the embrace of pleasing sleep I lay,
Sudden, invited by auspicious gales,
They land my goods, and hoist their flying sails.
Abandon’d here, my fortune I deplore
A hapless exile on a foreign shore,”

Thus while he spoke, the blue-eyed maid began
With pleasing smiles to view the godlike man;
Then changed her form: and now, divinely bright,
Jove’s heavenly daughter stood confess’d to sight;
Like a fair virgin in her beauty’s bloom,
Skill’d in the illustrious labours of the loom.

“O still the same Ulysses! (she rejoin’d,)
In useful craft successfully refined!
Artful in speech, in action, and in mind!
Sufficed it not, that, thy long labours pass’d,
Secure thou seest thy native shore at last?
But this to me? who, like thyself, excel
In arts of counsel and dissembling well;
To me? whose wit exceeds the powers divine,
No less than mortals are surpass’d by thine.
Know’st thou not me; who made thy life my care,
Through ten years’ wandering, and through ten years’ war;
Who taught thee arts, Alcinous to persuade,
To raise his wonder, and engage his aid;
And now appear, thy treasures to protect,
Conceal thy person, thy designs direct,
And tell what more thou must from Fate expect;
Domestic woes far heavier to be borne!
The pride of fools, and slaves’ insulting scorn?
But thou be silent, nor reveal thy state;
Yield to the force of unresisted Fate,
And bear unmoved the wrongs of base mankind,
The last, and hardest, conquest of the mind.”

“Goddess of wisdom! (Ithacus replies,)
He who discerns thee must be truly wise,
So seldom view’d and ever in disguise!
When the bold Argives led their warring powers,
Against proud Ilion’s well-defended towers,
Ulysses was thy care, celestial maid!
Graced with thy sight, and favoured with thy aid.
But when the Trojan piles in ashes lay,
And bound for Greece we plough’d the watery way;
Our fleet dispersed, and driven from coast to coast,
Thy sacred presence from that hour I lost;
Till I beheld thy radiant form once more,
And heard thy counsels on Phæacia’s shore.
But, by the almighty author of thy race,
Tell me, oh tell, is this my native place?
For much I fear, long tracts of land and sea
Divide this coast from distant Ithaca;
The sweet delusion kindly you impose,
To soothe my hopes, and mitigate my woes.”

Thus he. The blue-eyed goddess thus replies;
“How prone to doubt, how cautious are the wise!
Who, versed in fortune, fear the flattering show,
And taste not half the bliss the gods bestow.
The more shall Pallas aid thy just desires,
And guard the wisdom which herself inspires.
Others long absent from their native place,
Straight seek their home, and fly with eager pace
To their wives’ arms, and children’s dear embrace.
Not thus Ulysses; he decrees to prove
His subjects’ faith, and queen’s suspected love;
Who mourn’d her lord twice ten revolving years,
And wastes the days in grief, the nights in tears.
But Pallas knew (thy friends and navy lost)
Once more ’twas given thee to behold thy coast;
Yet how could I with adverse Fate engage,
And mighty Neptune’s unrelenting rage?
Now lift thy longing eyes, while I restore
The pleasing prospect of thy native shore.
Bebold the port of Phorcys! fenced around
With rocky mountains, and with olives crown’d,
Behold the gloomy grot! whose cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas;
Whose now-neglected altars in thy reign
Blush’d with the blood of sheep and oxen slain,
Behold! where Neritus the clouds divides,
And shakes the waving forests on his sides.”

So spake the goddess; and the prospect clear’d,
The mists dispersed, and all the coast appeared.
The king with joy confess’d his place of birth,
And on his knees salutes his mother earth;
Then, with his suppliant hands upheld in air,
Thus to the sea-green sisters sends his prayer;

“All hail! ye virgin daughters of the main!
Ye streams, beyond my hopes, beheld again!
To you once more your own Ulysses bows;
Attend his transports, and receive his vows!
If Jove prolong my days, and Pallas crown
The growing virtues of my youthful son,
To you shall rites divine be ever paid,
And grateful offerings on your altars laid.”

Thus then Minerva: “From that anxious breast
Dismiss those cares, and leave to heaven the rest.
Our task be now thy treasured stores to save,
Deep in the close recesses of the cave;
Then future means consult.” She spoke, and trod
The shady grot, that brighten’d with the god.
The closest caverns of the grot she sought;
The gold, the brass, the robes, Ulysses brought;
These in the secret gloom the chief disposed;
The entrance with a rock the goddess closed.

Now, seated in the olive’s sacred shade,
Confer the hero and the martial maid.
The goddess of the azure eyes began:
“Son of Laertes! much-experienced man!
The suitor-train thy earliest care demand,
Of that luxurious race to rid the land;
Three years thy house their lawless rule has seen,
And proud addresses to the matchless queen.
But she thy absence mourns from day to day,
And inly bleeds, and silent wastes away;
Elusive of the bridal hour, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.”

To this Ulysses: “O celestial maid!
Praised be thy counsel, and thy timely aid;
Else had I seen my native walls in vain,
Like great Atrides, just restored and slain.
Vouchsafe the means of vengeance to debate,
And plan with all thy arts the scene of fate.
Then, then be present, and my soul inspire,
As when we wrapp’d Troy’s heaven-built walls in fire.
Though leagued against me hundred heroes stand.
Hundreds shall fall, if Pallas aid my hand.”

She answer’d: “In the dreadful day of fight
Know, I am with thee, strong in all my might.
If thou but equal to thyself be found,
What gasping numbers then shall press the ground!
What human victims stain the feastful floor!
How wide the pavements float with guilty gore!
It fits thee now to wear a dark disguise,
And secret walk unknown to mortal eyes.
For this, my hand shall wither every grace,
And every elegance of form and face;
O’er thy smooth skin a bark of wrinkles spread,
Turn hoar the auburn honours of thy head;
Disfigure every limb with coarse attire,
And in thy eyes extinguish all the fire;
Add all the wants and the decays of life;
Estrange thee from thy own; thy son, thy wife;
From the loathed object every sight shall turn,
And the blind suitors their destruction scorn.

“Go first the master of thy herds to find,
True to his charge, a loyal swain and kind;
For thee he sighs; and to the loyal heir
And chaste Penelope extends his care.
At the Coracian rock he now resides,
Where Arethusa’s sable water glides;
The sable water and the copious mast
Swell the fat herd; luxuriant, large repast!
With him rest peaceful in the rural cell,
And all you ask his faithful tongue shall tell.
Me into other realms my cares convey,
To Sparta, still with female beauty gay;
For know, to Sparta thy loved offspring came,
To learn thy fortunes from the voice of Fame.”

At this the father, with a father’s care:
“Must he too suffer? he, O goddess! bear
Of wanderings and of woes a wretched share?
Through the wild ocean plough the dangerous way,
And leave his fortunes and his house a prey?
Why would’st not thou, O all-enlighten’d mind!
Inform him certain, and protect him, kind?”

To whom Minerva: “Be thy soul at rest;
And know, whatever heaven ordains is best.
To fame I sent him, to acquire renown;
To other regions is his virtue known;
Secure he sits, near great Atrides placed;
With friendships strengthen’d, and with honours graced,
But lo! an ambush waits his passage o’er;
Fierce foes insidious intercept the shore;
In vain; far sooner all the murderous brood
This injured land shall fatten with their blood.”

She spake, then touch’d him with her powerful wand:
The skin shrunk up, and wither’d at her hand;
A swift old age o’er all his members spread;
A sudden frost was sprinkled on his head;
Nor longer in the heavy eye-ball shined
The glance divine, forth-beaming from the mind.
His robe, which spots indelible besmear,
In rags dishonest flutters with the air:
A stag’s torn hide is lapp’d around his reins;
A rugged staff his trembling hand sustains;
And at his side a wretched scrip was hung,
Wide-patch’d, and knotted to a twisted thong.
So looked the chief, so moved: to mortal eyes
Object uncouth! a man of miseries!
While Pallas, cleaving the wild fields of air,
To Sparta flies, Telemachus her care.




BOOK XIV.


ARGUMENT.
THE CONVERSATION WITH EUMAEUS.


Ulysses arrives in disguise at the house of Eumaeus, where he is
received, entertained, and lodged with the utmost hospitality. The
several discourses of that faithful old servant, with the feigned story
told by Ulysses to conceal himself, and other conversations on various
subjects, take up this entire book.


But he, deep-musing, o’er the mountains stray’d
Through mazy thickets of the woodland shade,
And cavern’d ways, the shaggy coast along
With cliffs and nodding forests overhung.
Eumaeus at his sylvan lodge he sought,
A faithful servant, and without a fault.
Ulysses found him busied as he sate
Before the threshold of his rustic gate;
Around the mansion in a circle shone
A rural portico of rugged stone
(In absence of his lord with honest toil
His own industrious hands had raised the pile).
The wall was stone from neighbouring quarries borne,
Encircled with a fence of native thorn,
And strong with pales, by many a weary stroke
Of stubborn labour hewn from heart of oak:
Frequent and thick. Within the space were rear’d
Twelve ample cells, the lodgments of his herd.
Full fifty pregnant females each contain’d;
The males without (a smaller race) remain’d;
Doom’d to supply the suitors’ wasteful feast,
A stock by daily luxury decreased;
Now scarce four hundred left. These to defend,
Four savage dogs, a watchful guard, attend.
Here sat Eumaeus, and his cares applied
To form strong buskins of well-season’d hide.
Of four assistants who his labour share,
Three now were absent on the rural care;
The fourth drove victims to a suitor train:
But he, of ancient faith, a simple swain,
Sigh’d, while he furnish’d the luxurious board,
And wearied Heaven with wishes for his lord.

Soon as Ulysses near the inclosure drew,
With open mouths the furious mastiffs flew:
Down sat the sage, and cautious to withstand,
Let fall the offensive truncheon from his hand.
Sudden, the master runs; aloud he calls;
And from his hasty hand the leather falls:
With showers of stones he drives then far away:
The scattering dogs around at distance bay.

“Unhappy stranger! (thus the faithful swain
Began with accent gracious and humane),
What sorrow had been mine, if at my gate
Thy reverend age had met a shameful fate!
Enough of woes already have I known;
Enough my master’s sorrows and my own.
While here (ungrateful task!) his herds I feed,
Ordain’d for lawless rioters to bleed!
Perhaps, supported at another’s board!
Far from his country roams my hapless lord;
Or sigh’d in exile forth his latest breath,
Now cover’d with the eternal shade of death!

“But enter this my homely roof, and see
Our woods not void of hospitality.
Then tell me whence thou art, and what the share
Of woes and wanderings thou wert born to bear.”

He said, and, seconding the kind request,
With friendly step precedes his unknown guest.
A shaggy goat’s soft hide beneath him spread,
And with fresh rushes heap’d an ample bed;
Jove touch’d the hero’s tender soul, to find
So just reception from a heart so kind:
And “Oh, ye gods! with all your blessings grace
(He thus broke forth) this friend of human race!”

The swain replied: “It never was our guise
To slight the poor, or aught humane despise:
For Jove unfolds our hospitable door,
’Tis Jove that sends the stranger and the poor,
Little, alas! is all the good I can
A man oppress’d, dependent, yet a man:
Accept such treatment as a swain affords,
Slave to the insolence of youthful lords!
Far hence is by unequal gods removed
That man of bounties, loving and beloved!
To whom whate’er his slave enjoys is owed,
And more, had Fate allow’d, had been bestow’d:
But Fate condemn’d him to a foreign shore;
Much have I sorrow’d, but my Master more.
Now cold he lies, to death’s embrace resign’d:
Ah, perish Helen! perish all her kind!
For whose cursed cause, in Agamemnon’s name,
He trod so fatally the paths of fame.”

His vest succinct then girding round his waist,
Forth rush’d the swain with hospitable haste.
Straight to the lodgments of his herd he run,
Where the fat porkers slept beneath the sun;
Of two, his cutlass launch’d the spouting blood;
These quarter’d, singed, and fix’d on forks of wood,
All hasty on the hissing coals he threw;
And smoking, back the tasteful viands drew.
Broachers and all then an the board display’d
The ready meal, before Ulysses laid
With flour imbrown’d; next mingled wine yet new,
And luscious as the bees’ nectareous dew:
Then sate, companion of the friendly feast,
With open look; and thus bespoke his guest:
“Take with free welcome what our hands prepare,
Such food as falls to simple servants’ share;
The best our lords consume; those thoughtless peers,
Rich without bounty, guilty without fears;
Yet sure the gods their impious acts detest,
And honour justice and the righteous breast.
Pirates and conquerors of harden’d mind,
The foes of peace, and scourges of mankind,
To whom offending men are made a prey
When Jove in vengeance gives a land away;
E’en these, when of their ill-got spoils possess’d,
Find sure tormentors in the guilty breast:
Some voice of God close whispering from within,
‘Wretch! this is villainy, and this is sin.’
But these, no doubt, some oracle explore,
That tells, the great Ulysses is no more.
Hence springs their confidence, and from our sighs
Their rapine strengthens, and their riots rise:
Constant as Jove the night and day bestows,
Bleeds a whole hecatomb, a vintage flows.
None match’d this hero’s wealth, of all who reign
O’er the fair islands of the neighbouring main.
Nor all the monarchs whose far-dreaded sway
The wide-extended continents obey:
First, on the main land, of Ulysses’ breed
Twelve herds, twelve flocks, on ocean’s margin feed;
As many stalls for shaggy goats are rear’d;
As many lodgments for the tusky herd;
Two foreign keepers guard: and here are seen
Twelve herds of goats that graze our utmost green;
To native pastors is their charge assign’d,
And mine the care to feed the bristly kind;
Each day the fattest bleeds of either herd,
All to the suitors’ wasteful board preferr’d.”
Thus he, benevolent: his unknown guest
With hunger keen devours the savoury feast;
While schemes of vengeance ripen in his breast.
Silent and thoughtful while the board he eyed,
Eumaeus pours on high the purple tide;
The king with smiling looks his joy express’d,
And thus the kind inviting host address’d:

“Say now, what man is he, the man deplored,
So rich, so potent, whom you style your lord?
Late with such affluence and possessions bless’d,
And now in honour’s glorious bed at rest.
Whoever was the warrior, he must be
To fame no stranger, nor perhaps to me:
Who (so the gods and so the Fates ordain’d)
Have wander’d many a sea, and many a land.”

“Small is the faith the prince and queen ascribe
(Replied Eumaeus) to the wandering tribe.
For needy strangers still to flattery fly,
And want too oft betrays the tongue to lie.
Each vagrant traveller, that touches here,
Deludes with fallacies the royal ear,
To dear remembrance makes his image rise,
And calls the springing sorrows from her eyes.
Such thou mayst be. But he whose name you crave
Moulders in earth, or welters on the wave,
Or food for fish or dogs his relics lie,
Or torn by birds are scatter’d through the sky.
So perish’d he: and left (for ever lost)
Much woe to all, but sure to me the most.
So mild a master never shall I find;
Less dear the parents whom I left behind,
Less soft my mother, less my father kind.
Not with such transport would my eyes run o’er,
Again to hail them in their native shore,
As loved Ulysses once more to embrace,
Restored and breathing in his natal place.
That name for ever dread, yet ever dear,
E’en in his absence I pronounce with fear:
In my respect, he bears a prince’s part;
But lives a very brother in my heart.”

Thus spoke the faithful swain, and thus rejoin’d
The master of his grief, the man of patient mind:
“Ulysses, friend! shall view his old abodes
(Distrustful as thou art), nor doubt the gods.
Nor speak I rashly, but with faith averr’d,
And what I speak attesting Heaven has heard.
If so, a cloak and vesture be my meed:
Till his return no title shall I plead,
Though certain be my news, and great my need.
Whom want itself can force untruths to tell,
My soul detests him as the gates of hell.

“Thou first be witness, hospitable Jove!
And every god inspiring social love!
And witness every household power that waits,
Guard of these fires, and angel of these gates!
Ere the next moon increase or this decay,
His ancient realms Ulysses shall survey,
In blood and dust each proud oppressor mourn,
And the lost glories of his house return.”

“Nor shall that meed be thine, nor ever more
Shall loved Ulysses hail this happy shore.
(Replied Eumaeus): to the present hour
Now turn thy thought, and joys within our power.
From sad reflection let my soul repose;
The name of him awakes a thousand woes.
But guard him, gods! and to these arms restore!
Not his true consort can desire him more;
Not old Laertes, broken with despair:
Not young Telemachus, his blooming heir.
Alas, Telemachus! my sorrows flow
Afresh for thee, my second cause of woe!
Like some fair plant set by a heavenly hand,
He grew, he flourish’d, and he bless’d the land;
In all the youth his father’s image shined,
Bright in his person, brighter in his mind.
What man, or god, deceived his better sense,
Far on the swelling seas to wander hence?
To distant Pylos hapless is he gone,
To seek his father’s fate and find his own!
For traitors wait his way, with dire design
To end at once the great Arcesian line.
But let us leave him to their wills above;
The fates of men are in the hand of Jove.
And now, my venerable guest! declare
Your name, your parents, and your native air:
Sincere from whence begun, your course relate,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?”

Thus he: and thus (with prompt invention bold)
The cautious chief his ready story told.

“On dark reserve what better can prevail,
Or from the fluent tongue produce the tale,
Than when two friends, alone, in peaceful place
Confer, and wines and cates the table grace;
But most, the kind inviter’s cheerful face?
Thus might we sit, with social goblets crown’d,
Till the whole circle of the year goes round:
Not the whole circle of the year would close
My long narration of a life of woes.
But such was Heaven’s high will! Know then, I came
From sacred Crete, and from a sire of fame:
Castor Hylacides (that name he bore),
Beloved and honour’d in his native shore;
Bless’d in his riches, in his children more.
Sprung of a handmaid, from a bought embrace,
I shared his kindness with his lawful race:
But when that fate, which all must undergo,
From earth removed him to the shades below,
The large domain his greedy sons divide,
And each was portion’d as the lots decide.
Little, alas! was left my wretched share,
Except a house, a covert from the air:
But what by niggard fortune was denied,
A willing widow’s copious wealth supplied.
My valour was my plea, a gallant mind,
That, true to honour, never lagg’d behind
(The sex is ever to a soldier kind).
Now wasting years my former strength confound,
And added woes have bow’d me to the ground;
Yet by the stubble you may guess the grain,
And mark the ruins of no vulgar man.
Me, Pallas gave to lead the martial storm,
And the fair ranks of battle to deform;
Me, Mars inspired to turn the foe to flight,
And tempt the secret ambush of the night.
Let ghastly Death in all his forms appear,
I saw him not, it was not mine to fear.
Before the rest I raised my ready steel,
The first I met, he yielded, or he fell.
But works of peace my soul disdain’d to bear,
The rural labour, or domestic care.
To raise the mast, the missile dart to wing,
And send swift arrows from the bounding string,
Were arts the gods made grateful to my mind;
Those gods, who turn (to various ends design’d)
The various thoughts and talents of mankind.
Before the Grecians touch’d the Trojan plain,
Nine times commander or by land or main,
In foreign fields I spread my glory far,
Great in the praise, rich in the spoils of war;
Thence charged with riches, as increased in fame,
To Crete return’d, an honourable name.
But when great Jove that direful war decreed,
Which roused all Greece, and made the mighty bleed;
Our states myself and Idomen employ
To lead their fleets, and carry death to Troy.
Nine years we warr’d; the tenth saw Ilion fall;
Homeward we sail’d, but heaven dispersed us all.
One only month my wife enjoy’d my stay;
So will’d the god who gives and takes away.
Nine ships I mann’d, equipp’d with ready stores,
Intent to voyage to the Ægyptian shores;
In feast and sacrifice my chosen train
Six days consum’d; the seventh we plough’d the main.
Crete’s ample fields diminish to our eye;
Before the Boreal blast the vessels fly;
Safe through the level seas we sweep our way;
The steersman governs, and the ships obey.
The fifth fair morn we stem the Ægyptian tide,
And tilting o’er the bay the vessels ride:
To anchor there my fellows I command,
And spies commission to explore the land.
But, sway’d by lust of gain, and headlong will,
The coasts they ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumult rise.
The reddening dawn reveals the circling fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and glancing shields.
Jove thunder’d on their side. Our guilty head
We turn’d to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lie dead.
I then explored my thought, what course to prove
(And sure the thought was dictated by Jove):
Oh, had he left me to that happier doom,
And saved a life of miseries to come!
The radiant helmet from my brows unlaced,
And low on earth my shield and javelin cast,
I meet the monarch with a suppliant’s face,
Approach his chariot, and his knees embrace,
He heard, he saved, he placed me at his side;
My state he pitied, and my tears he dried,
Restrain’d the rage the vengeful foe express’d,
And turn’d the deadly weapons from my breast.
Pious! to guard the hospitable rite,
And fearing Jove, whom mercy’s works delight.

“In Ægypt thus with peace and plenty bless’d,
I lived (and happy still have lived) a guest.
On seven bright years successive blessings wait;
The next changed all the colour of my fate.
A false Phoenician, of insiduous mind,
Versed in vile arts, and foe to humankind,
With semblance fair invites me to his home;
I seized the proffer (ever fond to roam):
Domestic in his faithless roof I stay’d,
Till the swift sun his annual circle made.
To Libya then he mediates the way;
With guileful art a stranger to betray,
And sell to bondage in a foreign land:
Much doubting, yet compell’d I quit the strand,
Through the mid seas the nimble pinnace sails,
Aloof from Crete, before the northern gales:
But when remote her chalky cliffs we lost,
And far from ken of any other coast,
When all was wild expanse of sea and air,
Then doom’d high Jove due vengeance to prepare.
He hung a night of horrors o’er their head
(The shaded ocean blacken’d as it spread):
He launch’d the fiery bolt: from pole to pole
Broad burst the lightnings, deep the thunders roll;
In giddy rounds the whirling ship is toss’d,
And all in clouds of smothering sulphur lost.
As from a hanging rock’s tremendous height,
The sable crows with intercepted flight
Drop endlong; scarr’d, and black with sulphurous hue,
So from the deck are hurl’d the ghastly crew.
Such end the wicked found! but Jove’s intent
Was yet to save the oppress’d and innocent.
Placed on the mast (the last resource of life)
With winds and waves I held unequal strife:
For nine long days the billows tilting o’er,
The tenth soft wafts me to Thesprotia’s shore.
The monarch’s son a shipwreck’d wretch relieved,
The sire with hospitable rites received,
And in his palace like a brother placed,
With gifts of price and gorgeous garments graced
While here I sojourn’d, oft I heard the fame
How late Ulysses to the country came.
How loved, how honour’d in this court he stay’d,
And here his whole collected treasure laid;
I saw myself the vast unnumber’d store
Of steel elaborate, and refulgent ore,
And brass high heap’d amidst the regal dome;
Immense supplies for ages yet to come!
Meantime he voyaged to explore the will
Of Jove, on high Dodona’s holy hill,
What means might best his safe return avail,
To come in pomp, or bear a secret sail?
Full oft has Phidon, whilst he pour’d the wine,
Attesting solemn all the powers divine,
That soon Ulysses would return, declared
The sailors waiting, and the ships prepared.
But first the king dismiss’d me from his shores,
For fair Dulichium crown’d with fruitful stores;
To good Acastus’ friendly care consign’d:
But other counsels pleased the sailors’ mind:
New frauds were plotted by the faithless train,
And misery demands me once again.
Soon as remote from shore they plough the wave,
With ready hands they rush to seize their slave;
Then with these tatter’d rags they wrapp’d me round
(Stripp’d of my own), and to the vessel bound.
At eve, at Ithaca’s delightful land
The ship arriv’d: forth issuing on the sand,
They sought repast; while to the unhappy kind,
The pitying gods themselves my chains unbind.
Soft I descended, to the sea applied
My naked breast, and shot along the tide.
Soon pass’d beyond their sight, I left the flood,
And took the spreading shelter of the wood.
Their prize escaped the faithless pirates mourn’d;
But deem’d inquiry vain, and to their ships return’d.
Screen’d by protecting gods from hostile eyes,
They led me to a good man and a wise,
To live beneath thy hospitable care,
And wait the woes Heaven dooms me yet to bear.”

“Unhappy guest! whose sorrows touch my mind!
(Thus good Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin’d,)
For real sufferings since I grieve sincere,
Check not with fallacies the springing tear:
Nor turn the passion into groundless joy
For him whom Heaven has destined to destroy.
Oh! had he perish’d on some well-fought day,
Or in his friend’s embraces died away!
That grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honours graced his son.
Now, snatch’d by harpies to the dreary coast,
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost!
While pensive in this solitary den,
Far from gay cities and the ways of men,
I linger life; nor to the court repair,
But when my constant queen commands my care;
Or when, to taste her hospitable board,
Some guest arrives, with rumours of her lord;
And these indulge their want, and those their woe,
And here the tears and there the goblets flow.
By many such have I been warn’d; but chief
By one Aetolian robb’d of all belief,
Whose hap it was to this our roof to roam,
For murder banish’d from his native home.
He swore, Ulysses on the coast of Crete
Stay’d but a season to refit his fleet;
A few revolving months should waft him o’er,
Fraught with bold warriors, and a boundless store
O thou! whom age has taught to understand,
And Heaven has guided with a favouring hand!
On god or mortal to obtrude a lie
Forbear, and dread to flatter as to die.
Nor for such ends my house and heart are free,
But dear respect to Jove, and charity.”

“And why, O swain of unbelieving mind!
(Thus quick replied the wisest of mankind)
Doubt you my oath? yet more my faith to try,
A solemn compact let us ratify,
And witness every power that rules the sky!
If here Ulysses from his labours rest,
Be then my prize a tunic and a vest;
And where my hopes invite me, straight transport
In safety to Dulichium’s friendly court.
But if he greets not thy desiring eye,
Hurl me from yon dread precipice on high:
The due reward of fraud and perjury.”

“Doubtless, O guest! great laud and praise were mine
(Replied the swain, for spotless faith divine),
If after social rites and gifts bestow’d,
I stain’d my hospitable hearth with blood.
How would the gods my righteous toils succeed,
And bless the hand that made a stranger bleed?
No more—the approaching hours of silent night
First claim refection, then to rest invite;
Beneath our humble cottage let us haste,
And here, unenvied, rural dainties taste.”

Thus communed these; while to their lowly dome
The full-fed swine return’d with evening home;
Compell’d, reluctant, to their several sties,
With din obstreperous, and ungrateful cries.
Then to the slaves: “Now from the herd the best
Select in honour of our foreign guest:
With him let us the genial banquet share,
For great and many are the griefs we bear;
While those who from our labours heap their board
Blaspheme their feeder, and forget their lord.”

Thus speaking, with despatchful hand he took
A weighty axe, and cleft the solid oak;
This on the earth he piled; a boar full fed,
Of five years’ age, before the pile was led:
The swain, whom acts of piety delight,
Observant of the gods, begins the rite;
First shears the forehead of the bristly boar,
And suppliant stands, invoking every power
To speed Ulysses to his native shore.
A knotty stake then aiming at his head,
Down dropped he groaning, and the spirit fled.
The scorching flames climb round on every side;
Then the singed members they with skill divide;
On these, in rolls of fat involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
Some in the flames bestrew’d with flour they threw;
Some cut in fragments from the forks they drew:
These while on several tables they dispose.
A priest himself the blameless rustic rose;
Expert the destined victim to dispart
In seven just portions, pure of hand and heart.
One sacred to the nymphs apart they lay:
Another to the winged son of May;
The rural tribe in common share the rest,
The king the chine, the honour of the feast,
Who sate delighted at his servant’s board;
The faithful servant joy’d his unknown lord.
“Oh be thou dear (Ulysses cried) to Jove,
As well thou claim’st a grateful stranger’s love!”

“Be then thy thanks (the bounteous swain replied)
Enjoyment of the good the gods provide.
From God’s own hand descend our joys and woes;
These he decrees, and he but suffers those:
All power is his, and whatsoe’er he wills,
The will itself, omnipotent, fulfils.”
This said, the first-fruits to the gods he gave;
Then pour’d of offer’d wine the sable wave:
In great Ulysses’ hand he placed the bowl,
He sate, and sweet refection cheer’d his soul.
The bread from canisters Mesaulius gave
(Eumaeus’ proper treasure bought this slave,
And led from Taphos, to attend his board,
A servant added to his absent lord);
His task it was the wheaten loaves to lay,
And from the banquet take the bowls away.
And now the rage of hunger was repress’d,
And each betakes him to his couch to rest.

Now came the night, and darkness cover’d o’er
The face of things; the winds began to roar;
The driving storm the watery west-wind pours,
And Jove descends in deluges of showers.
Studious of rest and warmth, Ulysses lies,
Foreseeing from the first the storm would rise
In mere necessity of coat and cloak,
With artful preface to his host he spoke:
“Hear me, my friends! who this good banquet grace;
’Tis sweet to play the fool in time and place,
And wine can of their wits the wise beguile,
Make the sage frolic, and the serious smile,
The grave in merry measures frisk about,
And many a long-repented word bring out.
Since to be talkative I now commence,
Let wit cast off the sullen yoke of sense.
Once I was strong (would Heaven restore those days!)
And with my betters claim’d a share of praise.
Ulysses, Menelaus, led forth a band,
And join’d me with them (’twas their own command);
A deathful ambush for the foe to lay,
Beneath Troy walls by night we took our way:
There, clad in arms, along the marshes spread,
We made the osier-fringed bank our bed.
Full soon the inclemency of heaven I feel,
Nor had these shoulders covering, but of steel.
Sharp blew the north; snow whitening all the fields
Froze with the blast, and gathering glazed our shields.
There all but I, well fenced with cloak and vest,
Lay cover’d by their ample shields at rest.
Fool that I was! I left behind my own,
The skill of weather and of winds unknown,
And trusted to my coat and shield alone!
When now was wasted more than half the night,
And the stars faded at approaching light,
Sudden I jogg’d Ulysses, who was laid
Fast by my side, and shivering thus I said:

“‘Here longer in this field I cannot lie;
The winter pinches, and with cold I die,
And die ashamed (O wisest of mankind),
The only fool who left his cloak behind.’

“He thought and answer’d: hardly waking yet,
Sprung in his mind a momentary wit
(That wit, which or in council or in fight,
Still met the emergence, and determined right).
‘Hush thee (he cried, soft whispering in my ear),
Speak not a word, lest any Greek may hear’—
And then (supporting on his arm his head),
‘Hear me, companions! (thus aloud he said:)
Methinks too distant from the fleet we lie:
E’en now a vision stood before my eye,
And sure the warning vision was from high:
Let from among us some swift courier rise,
Haste to the general, and demand supplies.’

“Up started Thoas straight, Andraemon’s son,
Nimbly he rose, and cast his garment down!
Instant, the racer vanish’d off the ground;
That instant in his cloak I wrapp’d me round:
And safe I slept, till brightly-dawning shone
The morn conspicuous on her golden throne.

“Oh were my strength as then, as then my age!
Some friend would fence me from the winter’s rage.
Yet, tatter’d as I look, I challenged then
The honours and the offices of men:
Some master, or some servant would allow
A cloak and vest—but I am nothing now!”

“Well hast thou spoke (rejoin’d the attentive swain):
Thy lips let fall no idle word or vain!
Nor garment shalt thou want, nor aught beside,
Meet for the wandering suppliant to provide.
But in the morning take thy clothes again,
For here one vest suffices every swain:
No change of garments to our hinds is known;
But when return’d, the good Ulysses’ son
With better hand shall grace with fit attires
His guest, and send thee where thy soul desires.”

The honest herdsman rose, as this he said,
And drew before the hearth the stranger’s bed;
The fleecy spoils of sheep, a goat’s rough hide
He spreads; and adds a mantle thick and wide;
With store to heap above him, and below,
And guard each quarter as the tempests blow.
There lay the king, and all the rest supine;
All, but the careful master of the swine:
Forth hasted he to tend his bristly care;
Well arm’d, and fenced against nocturnal air:
His weighty falchion o’er his shoulder tied:
His shaggy cloak a mountain goat supplied:
With his broad spear the dread of dogs and men,
He seeks his lodging in the rocky den.
There to the tusky herd he bends his way,
Where, screen’d from Boreas, high o’erarch’d they lay.




BOOK XV.


ARGUMENT.
THE RETURN OF TELEMACHUS.


The goddess Minerva commands Telemachus in a vision to return to
Ithaca. Pisistratus and he take leave of Menelaus, and arrive at Pylos,
where they part: and Telemachus sets sail, after having received on
board Theoclymenus the soothsayer. The scene then changes to the
cottage of Eumaeus, who entertains Ulysses with a recital of his
adventures. In the meantime Telemachus arrives on the coast, and
sending the vessel to the town, proceeds by himself to the lodge of
Eumaeus.


Now had Minerva reach’d those ample plains,
Famed for the dance, where Menelaus reigns:
Anxious she flies to great Ulysses’ heir,
His instant voyage challenged all her care.
Beneath the royal portico display’d,
With Nestor’s son Telemachus was laid:
In sleep profound the son of Nestor lies;
Not thine, Ulysses! Care unseal’d his eyes:
Restless he grieved, with various fears oppress’d,
And all thy fortunes roll’d within his breast.
When, “O Telemachus! (the goddess said)
Too long in vain, too widely hast thou stray’d,
Thus leaving careless thy paternal right
The robbers’ prize, the prey to lawless might.
On fond pursuits neglectful while you roam,
E’en now the hand of rapine sacks the dome.
Hence to Atrides; and his leave implore
To launch thy vessel for thy natal shore;
Fly, whilst thy mother virtuous yet withstands
Her kindred’s wishes, and her sire’s commands;
Through both, Eurymachus pursues the dame,
And with the noblest gifts asserts his claim.
Hence, therefore, while thy stores thy own remain;
Thou know’st the practice of the female train,
Lost in the children of the present spouse,
They slight the pledges of their former vows;
Their love is always with the lover past;
Still the succeeding flame expels the last.
Let o’er thy house some chosen maid preside,
Till Heaven decrees to bless thee in a bride.
But now thy more attentive ears incline,
Observe the warnings of a power divine;
For thee their snares the suitor lords shall lay
In Samos’ sands, or straits of Ithaca;
To seize thy life shall lurk the murderous band,
Ere yet thy footsteps press thy native land.
No!—sooner far their riot and their lust
All-covering earth shall bury deep in dust!
Then distant from the scatter’d islands steer,
Nor let the night retard thy full career;
Thy heavenly guardian shall instruct the gales
To smooth thy passage and supply thy sails:
And when at Ithaca thy labour ends,
Send to the town the vessel with thy friends;
But seek thou first the master of the swine
(For still to thee his loyal thoughts incline);
There pass the night: while he his course pursues
To bring Penelope the wish’d-for news,
That thou, safe sailing from the Pylian strand,
Art come to bless her in thy native land.”
Thus spoke the goddess, and resumed her flight
To the pure regions of eternal light,
Meanwhile Pisistratus he gently shakes,
And with these words the slumbering youth awakes:

“Rise, son of Nestor; for the road prepare,
And join the harness’d coursers to the car.”

“What cause (he cried) can justify our flight
To tempt the dangers of forbidding night?
Here wait we rather, till approaching day
Shall prompt our speed, and point the ready way.
Nor think of flight before the Spartan king
Shall bid farewell, and bounteous presents bring;
Gifts, which to distant ages safely stored,
The sacred act of friendship shall record.”

Thus he. But when the dawn bestreak’d the east,
The king from Helen rose, and sought his guest.
As soon as his approach the hero knew,
The splendid mantle round him first he threw,
Then o’er his ample shoulders whirl’d the cloak,
Respectful met the monarch, and bespoke:

“Hail, great Atrides, favour’d of high Jove!
Let not thy friends in vain for licence move.
Swift let us measure back the watery way,
Nor check our speed, impatient of delay.”

“If with desire so strong thy bosom glows,
Ill (said the king) should I thy wish oppose;
For oft in others freely I reprove
The ill-timed efforts of officious love;
Who love too much, hate in the like extreme,
And both the golden mean alike condemn.
Alike he thwarts the hospitable end,
Who drives the free, or stays the hasty friend:
True friendship’s laws are by this rule express’d,
Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.
Yet, stay, my friends, and in your chariot take
The noblest presents that our love can make;
Meantime commit we to our women’s care
Some choice domestic viands to prepare;
The traveller, rising from the banquet gay,
Eludes the labours of the tedious way,
Then if a wider course shall rather please,
Through spacious Argos and the realms of Greece,
Atrides in his chariot shall attend;
Himself thy convoy to each royal friend.
No prince will let Ulysses’ heir remove
Without some pledge, some monument of love:
These will the caldron, these the tripod give;
From those the well-pair’d mules we shall receive,
Or bowl emboss’d whose golden figures live.”

To whom the youth, for prudence famed, replied:
“O monarch, care of heaven! thy people’s pride!
No friend in Ithaca my place supplies,
No powerful hands are there, no watchful eyes:
My stores exposed and fenceless house demand
The speediest succour from my guardian hand;
Lest, in a search too anxious and too vain,
Of one lost joy, I lose what yet remain.”

His purpose when the generous warrior heard,
He charged the household cates to be prepared.
Now with the dawn, from his adjoining home,
Was Boethoedes Eteoneus come;
Swift at the word he forms the rising blaze,
And o’er the coals the smoking fragments lays.
Meantime the king, his son, and Helen went
Where the rich wardrobe breathed a costly scent;
The king selected from the glittering rows
A bowl; the prince a silver beaker chose.
The beauteous queen revolved with careful eyes
Her various textures of unnumber’d dyes,
And chose the largest; with no vulgar art
Her own fair hands embroider’d every part;
Beneath the rest it lay divinely bright,
Like radiant Hesper o’er the gems of night,
Then with each gift they hasten’d to their guest,
And thus the king Ulysses’ heir address’d:
“Since fix’d are thy resolves, may thundering Jove
With happiest omens thy desires approve!
This silver bowl, whose costly margins shine
Enchased with gold, this valued gift be thine;
To me this present, of Vulcanian frame,
From Sidon’s hospitable monarch came;
To thee we now consign the precious load,
The pride of kings, and labour of a god.”

Then gave the cup, while Megapenthe brought
The silver vase with living sculpture wrought.
The beauteous queen, advancing next, display’d
The shining veil, and thus endearing said:

“Accept, dear youth, this monument of love,
Long since, in better days, by Helen wove:
Safe in thy mother’s care the vesture lay,
To deck thy bride and grace thy nuptial day.
Meantime may’st thou with happiest speed regain
Thy stately palace, and thy wide domain.”

She said, and gave the veil; with grateful look
The prince the variegated present took.
And now, when through the royal dome they pass’d,
High on a throne the king each stranger placed.
A golden ewer the attendant damsel brings,
Replete with water from the crystal springs;
With copious streams the shining vase supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
The glittering canisters are crown’d with bread;
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour; rich repast!
Whilst Eteoneus portions out the shares
Atrides’ son the purple draught prepares,
And now (each sated with the genial feast,
And the short rage of thirst and hunger ceased)
Ulysses’ son, with his illustrious friend,
The horses join, the polish’d car ascend,
Along the court the fiery steeds rebound,
And the wide portal echoes to the sound.
The king precedes; a bowl with fragrant wine
(Libation destined to the powers divine)
His right hand held: before the steed he stands,
Then, mix’d with prayers, he utters these commands:

“Farewell, and prosper, youths! let Nestor know
What grateful thoughts still in this bosom glow,
For all the proofs of his paternal care,
Through the long dangers of the ten years’ war.”
“Ah! doubt not our report (the prince rejoin’d)
Of all the virtues of thy generous mind.
And oh! return’d might we Ulysses meet!
To him thy presents show, thy words repeat:
How will each speech his grateful wonder raise!
How will each gift indulge us in thy praise!”

Scarce ended thus the prince, when on the right
Advanced the bird of Jove: auspicious sight!
A milk-white fowl his clinching talons bore,
With care domestic pampered at the floor.
Peasants in vain with threatening cries pursue,
In solemn speed the bird majestic flew
Full dexter to the car; the prosperous sight
Fill’d every breast with wonder and delight.

But Nestor’s son the cheerful silence broke,
And in these words the Spartan chief bespoke:
“Say if to us the gods these omens send,
Or fates peculiar to thyself portend?”

Whilst yet the monarch paused, with doubts oppress’d
The beauteous queen relieved his labouring breast:
“Hear me (she cried), to whom the gods have given
To read this sign, and mystic sense of heaven,
As thus the plumy sovereign of the air
Left on the mountain’s brow his callow care,
And wander’d through the wide ethereal way
To pour his wrath on yon luxurious prey;
So shall thy godlike father, toss’d in vain
Through all the dangers of the boundless main,
Arrive (or if perchance already come)
From slaughter’d gluttons to release the dome.”

“Oh! if this promised bliss by thundering Jove
(The prince replied) stand fix’d in fate above;
To thee, as to some god, I’ll temples raise.
And crown thy altars with the costly blaze.”

He said; and bending o’er his chariot, flung
Athwart the fiery steeds the smarting thong;
The bounding shafts upon the harness play,
Till night descending intercepts the way.
To Diocles at Pherae they repair,
Whose boasted sire was sacred Alpheus’ heir;
With him all night the youthful stranger stay’d,
Nor found the hospitable rites unpaid,
But soon as morning from her orient bed
Had tinged the mountains with her earliest red,
They join’d the steeds, and on the chariot sprung,
The brazen portals in their passage rung.

To Pylos soon they came; when thus begun
To Nestor’s heir Ulysses’ godlike son:

“Let not Pisistratus in vain be press’d,
Nor unconsenting hear his friend’s request;
His friend by long hereditary claim,
In toils his equal, and in years the same.
No farther from our vessel, I implore,
The coursers drive; but lash them to the shore.
Too long thy father would his friend detain;
I dread his proffer’d kindness urged in vain.”

The hero paused, and ponder’d this request,
While love and duty warr’d within his breast.
At length resolved, he turn’d his ready hand,
And lash’d his panting coursers to the strand.
There, while within the poop with care he stored
The regal presents of the Spartan lord,
“With speed begone (said he); call every mate,
Ere yet to Nestor I the tale relate:
’Tis true, the fervour of his generous heart
Brooks no repulse, nor couldst thou soon depart:
Himself will seek thee here, nor wilt thou find,
In words alone, the Pylian monarch kind.
But when, arrived, he thy return shall know
How will his breast with honest fury glow!”
This said, the sounding strokes his horses fire,
And soon he reached the palace of his sire.

“Now (cried Telemachus) with speedy care
Hoist every sail, and every oar prepare.”
Swift as the word his willing mates obey,
And seize their seats, impatient for the sea.

Meantime the prince with sacrifice adores
Minerva, and her guardian aid implores;
When lo! a wretch ran breathless to the shore,
New from his crime; and reeking yet with gore.
A seer he was, from great Melampus sprung,
Melampus, who in Pylos flourish’d long,
Till, urged by wrongs, a foreign realm he chose,
Far from the hateful cause of all his woes.
Neleus his treasures one long year detains,
As long he groan’d in Philacus’s chains:
Meantime, what anguish and what rage combined
For lovely Pero rack’d his labouring mind!
Yet ’scaped he death; and vengeful of his wrong
To Pylos drove the lowing herds along:
Then (Neleus vanquish’d, and consign’d the fair
To Bias’ arms) he so sought a foreign air;
Argos the rich for his retreat he chose,
There form’d his empire; there his palace rose.
From him Antiphates and Mantius came:
The first begot Oicleus great in fame,
And he Amphiaraus, immortal name!
The people’s saviour, and divinely wise,
Beloved by Jove, and him who gilds the skies;
Yet short his date of life! by female pride he dies.
From Mantius Clitus, whom Aurora’s love
Snatch’d for his beauty to the thrones above;
And Polyphides, on whom Phœbus shone
With fullest rays, Amphiaraus now gone;
In Hyperesia’s groves he made abode,
And taught mankind the counsels of the god.
From him sprung Theoclymenus, who found
(The sacred wine yet foaming on the ground)
Telemachus: whom, as to Heaven he press’d
His ardent vows, the stranger thus address’d:

“O thou! that dost thy happy course prepare
With pure libations and with solemn prayer:
By that dread power to whom thy vows are paid;
By all the lives of these; thy own dear head,
Declare sincerely to no foe’s demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land.”

“Prepare, then (said Telemachus), to know
A tale from falsehood free, not free from woe.
From Ithaca, of royal birth I came,
And great Ulysses (ever honour’d name!)
Once was my sire, though now, for ever lost,
In Stygian gloom he glides a pensive ghost!
Whose fate inquiring through the world we rove;
The last, the wretched proof of filial love.”

The stranger then: “Nor shall I aught conceal,
But the dire secret of my fate reveal.
Of my own tribe an Argive wretch I slew;
Whose powerful friends the luckless deed pursue
With unrelenting rage, and force from home
The blood-stain’d exile, ever doom’d to roam.
But bear, oh bear me o’er yon azure flood;
Receive the suppliant! spare my destined blood!”

“Stranger (replied the prince) securely rest
Affianced in our faith; henceforth our guest.”
Thus affable, Ulysses’ godlike heir
Takes from the stranger’s hand the glittering spear:
He climbs the ship, ascends the stern with haste
And by his side the guest accepted placed.
The chief his order gives: the obedient band,
With due observance wait the chief’s command:
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
Minerva calls; the ready gales obey
With rapid speed to whirl them o’er the sea.
Crunus they pass’d, next Chalcis roll’d away,
With thickening darkness closed the doubtful day;
The silver Phaea’s glittering rills they lost,
And skimm’d along by Elis’ sacred coast.
Then cautious through the rocky reaches wind,
And turning sudden, shun the death design’d.

Meantime, the king, Eumaeus, and the rest,
Sate in the cottage, at their rural feast:
The banquet pass’d, and satiate every man,
To try his host, Ulysses thus began:

“Yet one night more, my friends, indulge your guest;
The last I purpose in your walls to rest:
To-morrow for myself I must provide,
And only ask your counsel, and a guide;
Patient to roam the street, by hunger led,
And bless the friendly hand that gives me bread.
There in Ulysses’ roof I may relate
Ulysses’ wanderings to his royal mate;
Or, mingling with the suitors’ haughty train,
Not undeserving some support obtain.
Hermes to me his various gifts imparts.
Patron of industry and manual arts:
Few can with me in dexterous works contend,
The pyre to build, the stubborn oak to rend;
To turn the tasteful viand o’er the flame;
Or foam the goblet with a purple stream.
Such are the tasks of men of mean estate,
Whom fortune dooms to serve the rich and great.”

“Alas! (Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin’d).
How sprung a thought so monstrous in thy mind?
If on that godless race thou would’st attend,
Fate owes thee sure a miserable end!
Their wrongs and blasphemies ascend the sky,
And pull descending vengeance from on high.
Not such, my friend, the servants of their feast:
A blooming train in rich embroidery dress’d,
With earth’s whole tribute the bright table bends,
And smiling round celestial youth attends.
Stay, then: no eye askance beholds thee here;
Sweet is thy converse to each social ear;
Well pleased, and pleasing, in our cottage rest,
Till good Telemachus accepts his guest
With genial gifts, and change of fair attires,
And safe conveys thee where thy soul desires.”

To him the man of woes; “O gracious Jove!
Reward this stranger’s hospitable love!
Who knows the son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheers the sad heart, nor lets affliction grieve.
Of all the ills unhappy mortals know,
A life of wanderings is the greatest woe;
On all their weary ways wait care and pain,
And pine and penury, a meagre train.
To such a man since harbour you afford,
Relate the farther fortunes of your lord;
What cares his mother’s tender breast engage,
And sire forsaken on the verge of age;
Beneath the sun prolong they yet their breath,
Or range the house of darkness and of death?”

To whom the swain: “Attend what you enquire;
Laertes lives, the miserable sire,
Lives, but implores of every power to lay
The burden down, and wishes for the day.
Torn from his offspring in the eve of life,
Torn from the embraces of his tender wife,
Sole, and all comfortless, he wastes away
Old age, untimely posting ere his day.
She too, sad mother! for Ulysses lost
Pined out her bloom, and vanish’d to a ghost;
(So dire a fate, ye righteous gods! avert
From every friendly, every feeling heart!)
While yet she was, though clouded o’er with grief.
Her pleasing converse minister’d relief:
With Climene, her youngest daughter, bred,
One roof contain’d us, and one table fed.
But when the softly-stealing pace of time
Crept on from childhood into youthful prime,
To Samos’ isle she sent the wedded fair;
Me to the fields; to tend the rural care;
Array’d in garments her own hands had wove,
Nor less the darling object of her love.
Her hapless death my brighter days o’ercast,
Yet Providence deserts me not at last;
My present labours food and drink procure,
And more, the pleasure to relieve the poor.
Small is the comfort from the queen to hear
Unwelcome news, or vex the royal ear;
Blank and discountenanced the servants stand,
Nor dare to question where the proud command;
No profit springs beneath usurping powers;
Want feeds not there where luxury devours,
Nor harbours charity where riot reigns:
Proud are the lords, and wretched are the swains.”

The suffering chief at this began to melt;
And, “O Eumaeus! thou (he cries) hast felt
The spite of fortune too! her cruel hand
Snatch’d thee an infant from thy native land!
Snatch’d from thy parents’ arms, thy parents’ eyes,
To early wants! a man of miseries!
The whole sad story, from its first, declare:
Sunk the fair city by the rage of war,
Where once thy parents dwelt? or did they keep,
In humbler life, the lowing herds and sheep?
So left perhaps to tend the fleecy train,
Rude pirates seized, and shipp’d thee o’er the main?
Doom’d a fair prize to grace some prince’s board,
The worthy purchase of a foreign lord.”

“If then my fortunes can delight my friend,
A story fruitful of events attend:
Another’s sorrow may thy ears enjoy,
And wine the lengthen’d intervals employ.
Long nights the now declining year bestows;
A part we consecrate to soft repose,
A part in pleasing talk we entertain;
For too much rest itself becomes a pain.
Let those, whom sleep invites, the call obey,
Their cares resuming with the dawning day:
Here let us feast, and to the feast be join’d
Discourse, the sweeter banquet of the mind;
Review the series of our lives, and taste
The melancholy joy of evils pass’d:
For he who much has suffer’d, much will know,
And pleased remembrance builds delight on woe.

“Above Ortygia lies an isle of fame,
Far hence remote, and Syria is the name
(There curious eyes inscribed with wonder trace
The sun’s diurnal, and his annual race);
Not large, but fruitful; stored with grass to keep
The bellowing oxen and the bleating sheep;
Her sloping hills the mantling vines adorn,
And her rich valleys wave with golden corn.
No want, no famine, the glad natives know,
Nor sink by sickness to the shades below;
But when a length of years unnerves the strong,
Apollo comes, and Cynthia comes along.
They bend the silver bow with tender skill,
And, void of pain, the silent arrows kill.
Two equal tribes this fertile land divide,
Where two fair cities rise with equal pride.
But both in constant peace one prince obey,
And Ctesius there, my father, holds the sway.
Freighted, it seems, with toys of every sort,
A ship of Sidon anchor’d in our port;
What time it chanced the palace entertain’d,
Skill’d in rich works, a woman of their land:
This nymph, where anchor’d the Phoenician train,
To wash her robes descending to the main,
A smooth tongued sailor won her to his mind
(For love deceives the best of womankind).
A sudden trust from sudden liking grew;
She told her name, her race, and all she knew,
‘I too (she cried) from glorious Sidon came,
My father Arybas, of wealthy fame:
But, snatch’d by pirates from my native place,
The Taphians sold me to this man’s embrace.’

“‘Haste then (the false designing youth replied),
Haste to thy country; love shall be thy guide;
Haste to thy father’s house, thy father’s breast,
For still he lives, and lives with riches blest.’

“‘Swear first (she cried), ye sailors! to restore
A wretch in safety to her native shore.’
Swift as she ask’d, the ready sailors swore.
She then proceeds: ‘Now let our compact made
Be nor by signal nor by word betray’d,
Nor near me any of your crew descried,
By road frequented, or by fountain side.
Be silence still our guard. The monarch’s spies
(For watchful age is ready to surmise)
Are still at hand; and this, revealed, must be
Death to yourselves, eternal chains to me.
Your vessel loaded, and your traffic pass’d,
Despatch a wary messenger with haste;
Then gold and costly treasures will I bring,
And more, the infant offspring of the king.
Him, child-like wandering forth, I’ll lead away
(A noble prize!) and to your ship convey.’

“Thus spoke the dame, and homeward took the road.
A year they traffic, and their vessel load.
Their stores complete, and ready now to weigh,
A spy was sent their summons to convey:
An artist to my father’s palace came,
With gold and amber chains, elaborate frame:
Each female eye the glittering links employ;
They turn, review, and cheapen every toy.
He took the occasion, as they stood intent,
Gave her the sign, and to his vessel went.
She straight pursued, and seized my willing arm;
I follow’d, smiling, innocent of harm.
Three golden goblets in the porch she found
(The guests not enter’d, but the table crown’d);
Hid in her fraudful bosom these she bore:
Now set the sun, and darken’d all the shore.
Arriving then, where tilting on the tides
Prepared to launch the freighted vessel rides,
Aboard they heave us, mount their decks, and sweep
With level oar along the glassy deep.
Six calmy days and six smooth nights we sail,
And constant Jove supplied the gentle gale.
The seventh, the fraudful wretch (no cause descried),
Touch’d by Diana’s vengeful arrow, died.
Down dropp’d the caitiff-corse, a worthless load,
Down to the deep; there roll’d, the future food
Of fierce sea-wolves, and monsters of the flood.
An helpless infant I remain’d behind;
Thence borne to Ithaca by wave and wind;
Sold to Laertes by divine command,
And now adopted to a foreign land.”

To him the king: “Reciting thus thy cares,
My secret soul in all thy sorrow shares;
But one choice blessing (such is Jove’s high will)
Has sweeten’d all thy bitter draught of ill:
Torn from thy country to no hapless end,
The gods have, in a master, given a friend.
Whatever frugal nature needs is thine
(For she needs little), daily bread and wine.
While I, so many wanderings past, and woes,
Live but on what thy poverty bestows.”

So passed in pleasing dialogue away
The night; then down to short repose they lay;
Till radiant rose the messenger of day.
While in the port of Ithaca, the band
Of young Telemachus approach’d the land;
Their sails they loosed, they lash’d the mast aside,
And cast their anchors, and the cables tied:
Then on the breezy shore, descending, join
In grateful banquet o’er the rosy wine.
When thus the prince: “Now each his course pursue;
I to the fields, and to the city you.
Long absent hence, I dedicate this day
My swains to visit, and the works survey.
Expect me with the morn, to pay the skies
Our debt of safe return in feast and sacrifice.”

Then Theoclymenus: “But who shall lend,
Meantime, protection to thy stranger friend?
Straight to the queen and palace shall I fly,
Or yet more distant, to some lord apply?”

The prince return’d: “Renown’d in days of yore
Has stood our father’s hospitable door;
No other roof a stranger should receive,
No other hands than ours the welcome give.
But in my absence riot fills the place,
Nor bears the modest queen a stranger’s face;
From noiseful revel far remote she flies,
But rarely seen, or seen with weeping eyes.
No—let Eurymachus receive my guest,
Of nature courteous, and by far the best;
He woos the queen with more respectful flame,
And emulates her former husband’s fame,
With what success, ’tis Jove’s alone to know,
And the hoped nuptials turn to joy or woe.”

Thus speaking, on the right up-soar’d in air
The hawk, Apollo’s swift-wing’d messenger:
His dreadful pounces tore a trembling dove;
The clotted feathers, scatter’d from above,
Between the hero and the vessel pour
Thick plumage mingled with a sanguine shower.

The observing augur took the prince aside,
Seized by the hand, and thus prophetic cried:
“Yon bird, that dexter cuts the aërial road,
Rose ominous, nor flies without a god:
No race but thine shall Ithaca obey,
To thine, for ages, Heaven decrees the sway.”

“Succeed the omens, gods! (the youth rejoin’d:)
Soon shall my bounties speak a grateful mind,
And soon each envied happiness attend
The man who calls Telemachus his friend.”
Then to Peiraeus: “Thou whom time has proved
A faithful servant, by thy prince beloved!
Till we returning shall our guest demand,
Accept this charge with honour, at our hand.”

To this Peiraeus: “Joyful I obey,
Well pleased the hospitable rites to pay.
The presence of thy guest shall best reward
(If long thy stay) the absence of my lord.”

With that, their anchors he commands to weigh,
Mount the tall bark, and launch into the sea.
All with obedient haste forsake the shores,
And, placed in order, spread their equal oars.
Then from the deck the prince his sandals takes;
Poised in his hand the pointed javelin shakes.
They part; while, lessening from the hero’s view
Swift to the town the well-row’d galley flew:
The hero trod the margin of the main,
And reach’d the mansion of his faithful swain.




BOOK XVI.


ARGUMENT.
THE DISCOVERY OF ULYSSES TO TELEMACHUS.


Telemachus arriving at the lodge of Eumaeus, sends him to carry
Penelope the news of his return. Minerva appearing to Ulysses, commands
him to discover himself to his son. The princes, who had lain in ambush
to intercept Telemachus in his way, their project being defeated,
return to Ithaca.


Soon as the morning blush’d along the plains,
Ulysses, and the monarch of the swains,
Awake the sleeping fires, their meals prepare,
And forth to pasture send the bristly care.
The prince’s near approach the dogs descry,
And fawning round his feet confess their joy.
Their gentle blandishment the king survey’d,
Heard his resounding step, and instant said:

“Some well-known friend, Eumaeus, bends this way;
His steps I hear; the dogs familiar play.”

While yet he spoke, the prince advancing drew
Nigh to the lodge, and now appear’d in view.
Transported from his seat Eumaeus sprung,
Dropp’d the full bowl, and round his bosom hung;
Kissing his cheek, his hand, while from his eye
The tears rain’d copious in a shower of joy,
As some fond sire who ten long winters grieves,
From foreign climes an only son receives
(Child of his age), with strong paternal joy,
Forward he springs, and clasps the favourite boy:
So round the youth his arms Eumaeus spread,
As if the grave had given him from the dead.

“And is it thou? my ever-dear delight!
Oh, art thou come to bless my longing sight?
Never, I never hoped to view this day,
When o’er the waves you plough’d the desperate way.
Enter, my child! Beyond my hopes restored,
Oh give these eyes to feast upon their lord.
Enter, oh seldom seen! for lawless powers
Too much detain thee from these sylvan bowers,”
The prince replied: “Eumaeus, I obey;
To seek thee, friend, I hither took my way.
But say, if in the court the queen reside
Severely chaste, or if commenced a bride?”

Thus he; and thus the monarch of the swains:
“Severely chaste Penelope remains;
But, lost to every joy, she wastes the day
In tedious cares, and weeps the night away.”

He ended, and (receiving as they pass
The javelin pointed with a star of brass),
They reach’d the dome; the dome with marble shined.
His seat Ulysses to the prince resign’d.
“Not so (exclaims the prince with decent grace)
For me, this house shall find an humbler place:
To usurp the honours due to silver hairs
And reverend strangers modest youth forbears.”
Instant the swain the spoils of beasts supplies,
And bids the rural throne with osiers rise.
There sate the prince: the feast Eumaeus spread,
And heap’d the shining canisters with bread.
Thick o’er the board the plenteous viands lay,
The frugal remnants of the former day.
Then in a bowl he tempers generous wines,
Around whose verge a mimic ivy twines.
And now, the rage of thirst and hunger fled,
Thus young Ulysses to Eumaeus said:

“Whence, father, from what shore this stranger, say?
What vessel bore him o’er the watery way?
To human step our land impervious lies,
And round the coast circumfluent oceans rise.”

The swain returns: “A tale of sorrows hear:
In spacious Crete he drew his natal air;
Long doom’d to wander o’er the land and main,
For Heaven has wove his thread of life with pain.
Half breathless ’scaping to the land he flew
From Thesprot mariners, a murderous crew.
To thee, my son, the suppliant I resign;
I gave him my protection, grant him thine.”

“Hard task (he cries) thy virtue gives thy friend,
Willing to aid, unable to defend.
Can strangers safely in the court reside,
’Midst the swell’d insolence of lust and pride?
E’en I unsafe: the queen in doubt to wed,
Or pay due honours to the nuptial bed.
Perhaps she weds regardless of her fame,
Deaf to the mighty Ulyssean name.
However, stranger! from our grace receive
Such honours as befit a prince to give;
Sandals, a sword and robes, respect to prove,
And safe to sail with ornaments of love.
Till then, thy guest amid the rural train,
Far from the court, from danger far, detain.
’Tis mine with food the hungry to supply,
And clothe the naked from the inclement sky.
Here dwell in safety from the suitors’ wrongs,
And the rude insults of ungovern’d tongues.
For should’st thou suffer, powerless to relieve,
I must behold it, and can only grieve.
The brave, encompass’d by an hostile train,
O’erpower’d by numbers, is but brave in vain.”

To whom, while anger in his bosom glows,
With warmth replies the man of mighty woes:
“Since audience mild is deign’d, permit my tongue
At once to pity and resent thy wrong.
My heart weeps blood to see a soul so brave
Live to base insolence or power a slave,
But tell me, dost thou, prince, dost thou behold,
And hear their midnight revels uncontroll’d?
Say, do thy subjects in bold faction rise,
Or priests in fabled oracles advise?
Or are thy brothers, who should aid thy power,
Turn’d mean deserters in the needful hour?
Oh that I were from great Ulysses sprung,
Or that these wither’d nerves like thine were strung,
Or, heavens! might he return! (and soon appear
He shall, I trust; a hero scorns despair:)
Might he return, I yield my life a prey
To my worst foe, if that avenging day
Be not their last: but should I lose my life,
Oppress’d by numbers in the glorious strife,
I chose the nobler part, and yield my breath,
Rather than bear dishonor, worse than death;
Than see the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger and the spotless maid;
Than see the wealth of kings consumed in waste,
The drunkard’s revel, and the gluttons’ feast.”

Thus he, with anger flashing from his eye;
Sincere the youthful hero made reply:
“Nor leagued in factious arms my subjects rise,
Nor priests in fabled oracles advise;
Nor are my brothers, who should aid my power,
Turn’d mean deserters in the needful hour.
Ah me! I boast no brother; heaven’s dread King
Gives from our stock an only branch to spring:
Alone Laertes reign’d Arcesius’ heir,
Alone Ulysses drew the vital air,
And I alone the bed connubial graced,
An unbless’d offspring of a sire unbless’d!
Each neighbouring realm, conducive to our woe,
Sends forth her peers, and every peer a foe:
The court proud Samos and Dulichium fills,
And lofty Zacinth crown’d with shady hills.
E’en Ithaca and all her lords invade
The imperial sceptre, and the regal bed:
The queen, averse to love, yet awed by power,
Seems half to yield, yet flies the bridal hour:
Meantime their licence uncontroll’d I bear;
E’en now they envy me the vital air:
But Heaven will sure revenge, and gods there are.

“But go Eumaeus! to the queen impart
Our safe return, and ease a mother’s heart.
Yet secret go; for numerous are my foes,
And here at least I may in peace repose.”

To whom the swain: “I hear and I obey:
But old Laertes weeps his life away,
And deems thee lost: shall I my speed employ
To bless his age: a messenger of joy?
The mournful hour that tore his son away
Sent the sad sire in solitude to stray;
Yet busied with his slaves, to ease his woe,
He dress’d the vine, and bade the garden blow,
Nor food nor wine refused; but since the day
That you to Pylos plough’d the watery way,
Nor wine nor food he tastes; but, sunk in woes,
Wild springs the vine, no more the garden blows,
Shut from the walks of men, to pleasure lost,
Pensive and pale he wanders half a ghost.”

“Wretched old man! (with tears the prince returns)
Yet cease to go—what man so blest but mourns?
Were every wish indulged by favouring skies,
This hour should give Ulysses to my eyes.
But to the queen with speed dispatchful bear,
Our safe return, and back with speed repair;
And let some handmaid of her train resort
To good Laertes in his rural court.”

While yet he spoke, impatient of delay,
He braced his sandals on, and strode away:
Then from the heavens the martial goddess flies
Through the wild fields of air, and cleaves the skies:
In form, a virgin in soft beauty’s bloom,
Skill’d in the illustrious labours of the loom.
Alone to Ithaca she stood display’d,
But unapparent as a viewless shade
Escaped Telemachus (the powers above,
Seen or unseen, o’er earth at pleasure move):
The dogs intelligent confess’d the tread
Of power divine, and howling, trembling, fled.
The goddess, beckoning, waves her deathless hands:
Dauntless the king before the goddess stands:

“Then why (she said), O favour’d of the skies!
Why to thy godlike son this long disguise?
Stand forth reveal’d; with him thy cares employ
Against thy foes; be valiant and destroy!
Lo! I descend in that avenging hour,
To combat by thy side, thy guardian power.”

She said, and o’er him waves her wand of gold
Imperial robes his manly limbs infold;
At once with grace divine his frame improves;
At once with majesty enlarged he moves:
Youth flush’d his reddening cheek, and from his brows
A length of hair in sable ringlets flows;
His blackening chin receives a deeper shade;
Then from his eyes upsprung the warrior-maid.

The hero reascends: the prince o’erawed
Scarce lifts his eyes, and bows as to a god,
Then with surprise (surprise chastised by fears):
“How art thou changed! (he cried)—a god appears!
Far other vests thy limbs majestic grace,
Far other glories lighten from thy face!
If heaven be thy abode, with pious care,
Lo! I the ready sacrifice prepare:
Lo! gifts of labour’d gold adorn thy shrine,
To win thy grace: O save us, power divine!”

“Few are my days (Ulysses made reply),
Nor I, alas! descendant of the sky.
I am thy father. O my son! my son!
That father, for whose sake thy days have run
One scene of woe! to endless cares consign’d,
And outraged by the wrongs of base mankind.”

Then, rushing to his arms, he kiss’d his boy
With the strong raptures of a parent’s joy.
Tears bathe his cheek, and tears the ground bedew:
He strain’d him close, as to his breast he grew.
“Ah me! (exclaims the prince with fond desire)
Thou art not—no, thou canst not be my sire.
Heaven such illusion only can impose,
By the false joy to aggravate my woes.
Who but a god can change the general doom,
And give to wither’d age a youthful bloom!
Late, worn with years, in weeds obscene you trod;
Now, clothed in majesty, you move a god!”

“Forbear (he cried,) for Heaven reserve that name;
Give to thy father but a father’s claim;
Other Ulysses shalt thou never see,
I am Ulysses, I, my son, am he.
Twice ten sad years o’er earth and ocean toss’d,
’Tis given at length to view my native coast.
Pallas, unconquer’d maid, my frame surrounds
With grace divine: her power admits no bounds;
She o’er my limbs old age and wrinkles shed;
Now strong as youth, magnificent I tread.
The gods with ease frail man depress or raise,
Exalt the lowly, or the proud debase.”

He spoke and sate. The prince with transport flew,
Hung round his neck, while tears his cheek bedew;
Nor less the father pour’d a social flood;
They wept abundant, and they wept aloud.
As the bold eagle with fierce sorrow stung,
Or parent vulture, mourns her ravish’d young;
They cry, they scream, their unfledged brood a prey
To some rude churl, and borne by stealth away:
So they aloud: and tears in tides had run,
Their grief unfinish’d with the setting sun;
But checking the full torrent in its flow,
The prince thus interrupts the solemn woe.
“What ship transported thee, O father, say;
And what bless’d hands have oar’d thee on the way?”

“All, all (Ulysses instant made reply),
I tell thee all, my child, my only joy!
Phæacians bore me to the port assign’d,
A nation ever to the stranger kind;
Wrapp’d in the embrace of sleep, the faithful train
O’er seas convey’d me to my native reign:
Embroider’d vestures, gold, and brass, are laid
Conceal’d in caverns in the sylvan shade.
Hither, intent the rival rout to slay,
And plan the scene of death, I bend my way;
So Pallas wills—but thou, my son, explain
The names and numbers of the audacious train;
’Tis mine to judge if better to employ
Assistant force, or singly to destroy.”

“O’er earth (returns the prince) resounds thy name,
Thy well-tried wisdom, and thy martial fame,
Yet at thy words I start, in wonder lost;
Can we engage, not decades but an host?
Can we alone in furious battle stand,
Against that numerous and determined band?
Hear then their numbers; from Dulichium came
Twice twenty-six, all peers of mighty name.
Six are their menial train: twice twelve the boast
Of Samos; twenty from Zacynthus’ coast:
And twelve our country’s pride; to these belong
Medon and Phemius, skill’d in heavenly song.
Two sewers from day to day the revels wait,
Exact of taste, and serve the feast in state.
With such a foe the unequal fight to try,
Were by false courage unrevenged to die.
Then what assistant powers you boast relate,
Ere yet we mingle in the stern debate.”

“Mark well my voice, (Ulysses straight replies:)
What need of aids, if favour’d by the skies?
If shielded to the dreadful fight we move,
By mighty Pallas, and by thundering Jove?”

“Sufficient they (Telemachus rejoin’d)
Against the banded powers of all mankind:
They, high enthroned above the rolling clouds,
Wither the strength of man, and awe the gods.”

“Such aids expect (he cries,) when strong in might
We rise terrific to the task of fight.
But thou, when morn salutes the aërial plain,
The court revisit and the lawless train:
Me thither in disguise Eumaeus leads,
An aged mendicant in tatter’d weeds.
There, if base scorn insult my reverend age,
Bear it, my son! repress thy rising rage.
If outraged, cease that outrage to repel;
Bear it, my son! howe’er thy heart rebel.
Yet strive by prayer and counsel to restrain
Their lawless insults, though thou strive in vain:
For wicked ears are deaf to wisdom’s call,
And vengeance strikes whom Heaven has doom’d to fall.
Once more attend: when she whose power inspires
The thinking mind, my soul to vengeance fires,
I give the sign: that instant, from beneath,
Aloft convey the instruments of death,
Armour and arms; and, if mistrust arise,
Thus veil the truth in plausible disguise:

“‘These glittering weapons, ere he sail’d to Troy,
Ulysses view’d with stern heroic joy:
Then, beaming o’er the illumined wall they shone;
Now dust dishonours, all their lustre gone.
I bear them hence (so Jove my soul inspires),
From the pollution of the fuming fires;
Lest when the bowl inflames, in vengeful mood
Ye rush to arms, and stain the feast with blood:
Oft ready swords in luckless hour incite
The hand of wrath, and arm it for the fight.’

“Such be the plea, and by the plea deceive:
For Jove infatuates all, and all believe.
Yet leave for each of us a sword to wield,
A pointed javelin, and a fenceful shield.
But by my blood that in thy bosom glows,
By that regard a son his father owes;
The secret, that thy father lives, retain
Lock’d in thy bosom from the household train;
Hide it from all; e’en from Eumaeus hide,
From my dear father, and my dearer bride.
One care remains, to note the loyal few
Whose faith yet lasts among the menial crew;
And noting, ere we rise in vengeance, prove
Who love his prince; for sure you merit love.”

To whom the youth: “To emulate, I aim,
The brave and wise, and my great father’s fame.
But reconsider, since the wisest err,
Vengeance resolved, ’tis dangerous to defer.
What length of time must we consume in vain,
Too curious to explore the menial train!
While the proud foes, industrious to destroy
Thy wealth, in riot the delay enjoy.
Suffice it in this exigence alone
To mark the damsels that attend the throne:
Dispersed the youth reside; their faith to prove
Jove grants henceforth, if thou hast spoke from Jove.”

While in debate they waste the hours away,
The associates of the prince repass’d the bay:
With speed they guide the vessel to the shores;
With speed debarking land the naval stores:
Then, faithful to their charge, to Clytius bear,
And trust the presents to his friendly care.
Swift to the queen a herald flies to impart
Her son’s return, and ease a parent’s heart:
Lest a sad prey to ever-musing cares,
Pale grief destroy what time awhile forbears.
The incautious herald with impatience burns,
And cries aloud, “Thy son, O queen, returns;”
Eumaeus sage approach’d the imperial throne,
And breathed his mandate to her ear alone,
Then measured back the way. The suitor band,
Stung to the soul, abash’d, confounded, stand;
And issuing from the dome, before the gate,
With clouded looks, a pale assembly sate.

At length Eurymachus: “Our hopes are vain;
Telemachus in triumph sails the main.
Haste, rear the mast, the swelling shroud display;
Haste, to our ambush’d friends the news convey!”

Scarce had he spake, when, turning to the strand,
Amphinomus survey’d the associate band;
Full to the bay within the winding shores
With gather’d sails they stood, and lifted oars.
“O friends!” he cried, elate with rising joy,
“See to the port secure the vessel fly!
Some god has told them, or themselves survey
The bark escaped; and measure back their way.”

Swift at the word descending to the shores,
They moor the vessel and unlade the stores:
Then, moving from the strand, apart they sate,
And full and frequent form’d a dire debate.

“Lives then the boy? he lives (Antinous cries),
The care of gods and favourite of the skies.
All night we watch’d, till with her orient wheels
Aurora flamed above the eastern hills,
And from the lofty brow of rocks by day
Took in the ocean with a broad survey
Yet safe he sails; the powers celestial give
To shun the hidden snares of death, and live.
But die he shall, and thus condemn’d to bleed,
Be now the scene of instant death decreed.
Hope ye success? undaunted crush the foe.
Is he not wise? know this, and strike the blow.
Wait ye, till he to arms in council draws
The Greeks, averse too justly to our cause?
Strike, ere, the states convened, the foe betray
Our murderous ambush on the watery way.
Or choose ye vagrant from their rage to fly,
Outcasts of earth, to breathe an unknown sky?
The brave prevent misfortune; then be brave,
And bury future danger in his grave.
Returns he? ambush’d we’ll his walk invade,
Or where he hides in solitude and shade;
And give the palace to the queen a dower,
Or him she blesses in the bridal hour.
But if submissive you resign the sway,
Slaves to a boy, go, flatter and obey.
Retire we instant to our native reign,
Nor be the wealth of kings consumed in vain;
Then wed whom choice approves: the queen be given
To some blest prince, the prince decreed by Heaven.”

Abash’d, the suitor train his voice attends;
Till from his throne Amphinomus ascends,
Who o’er Dulichium stretch’d his spacious reign,
A land of plenty, bless’d with every grain:
Chief of the numbers who the queen address’d,
And though displeasing, yet displeasing least.
Soft were his words; his actions wisdom sway’d;
Graceful awhile he paused, then mildly said:

“O friends, forbear! and be the thought withstood:
’Tis horrible to shed imperial blood!
Consult we first the all-seeing powers above,
And the sure oracles of righteous Jove.
If they assent, e’en by this hand he dies;
If they forbid, I war not with the skies.”

He said: the rival train his voice approved,
And rising instant to the palace moved.
Arrived, with wild tumultuous noise they sate,
Recumbent on the shining thrones of state.

Then Medon, conscious of their dire debates,
The murderous counsel to the queen relates.
Touch’d at the dreadful story, she descends:
Her hasty steps a damsel train attends.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Sudden before the rival powers she stands;
And, veiling, decent, with a modest shade
Her cheek, indignant to Antinous said:

“O void of faith! of all bad men the worst!
Renown’d for wisdom, by the abuse accursed!
Mistaking fame proclaims thy generous mind:
Thy deeds denote thee of the basest kind.
Wretch! to destroy a prince that friendship gives,
While in his guest his murderer he receives;
Nor dread superior Jove, to whom belong
The cause of suppliants, and revenge of wrong.
Hast thou forgot, ungrateful as thou art,
Who saved thy father with a friendly part?
Lawless he ravaged with his martial powers
The Taphian pirates on Thesprotia’s shores;
Enraged, his life, his treasures they demand;
Ulysses saved him from the avenger’s hand.
And would’st thou evil for his good repay?
His bed dishonour, and his house betray?
Afflict his queen, and with a murderous hand
Destroy his heir!—but cease, ’tis I command.”

“Far hence those fears (Eurymachus replied,)
O prudent princess! bid thy soul confide.
Breathes there a man who dares that hero slay,
While I behold the golden light of day?
No: by the righteous powers of heaven I swear,
His blood in vengeance smokes upon my spear.
Ulysses, when my infant days I led,
With wine sufficed me, and with dainties fed:
My generous soul abhors the ungrateful part,
And my friend’s son lives nearest to my heart.
Then fear no mortal arm; if Heaven destroy,
We must resign: for man is born to die.”

Thus smooth he ended, yet his death conspired:
Then sorrowing, with sad step the queen retired,
With streaming eyes, all comfortless deplored,
Touch’d with the dear remembrance of her lord:
Nor ceased till Pallas bids her sorrows fly,
And in soft slumber seal’d her flowing eye.

And now Eumaeus, at the evening hour,
Came late, returning to his sylvan bower.
Ulysses and his son had dress’d with art
A yearling boar, and gave the gods their part.
Holy repast! That instant from the skies
The martial goddess to Ulysses flies:
She waves her golden wand, and reassumes
From every feature every grace that blooms;
At once his vestures change; at once she sheds
Age o’er his limbs, that tremble as he treads:
Lest to the queen the swain with transport fly,
Unable to contain the unruly joy;
When near he drew, the prince breaks forth: “Proclaim
What tidings, friend? what speaks the voice of fame?
Say, if the suitors measure back the main,
Or still in ambush thirst for blood in vain?”

“Whether (he cries) they measure back the flood,
Or still in ambush thirst in vain for blood,
Escaped my care: where lawless suitors sway,
Thy mandate borne my soul disdain’d to stay.
But from the Hermaean height I cast a view,
Where to the port a bark high-bounding flew;
Her freight a shining band: with martial air
Each poised his shield, and each advanced his spear;
And, if aright these searching eyes survey,
The eluded suitors stem the watery way.”

The prince, well pleased to disappoint their wiles,
Steals on his sire a glance, and secret smiles.
And now, a short repast prepared, they fed
Till the keen rage of craving hunger fled:
Then to repose withdrawn, apart they lay,
And in soft sleep forgot the cares of day.




BOOK XVII.


ARGUMENT.


Telemachus returning to the city, relates to Penelope the sum of his
travels. Ulysses is conducted by Eumaeus to the palace, where his old
dog Argus acknowledges his master, after an absence of twenty years,
and dies with joy. Eumaeus returns into the country, and Ulysses
remains among the suitors, whose behaviour is described.


Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with roseate light the dewy lawn,
In haste the prince arose, prepared to part;
His hand impatient grasps the pointed dart;
Fair on his feet the polish’d sandals shine,
And thus he greets the master of the swine:

“My friend, adieu! let this short stay suffice;
I haste to meet my mother’s longing eyes,
And end her tears, her sorrows and her sighs.
But thou, attentive, what we order heed:
This hapless stranger to the city lead:
By public bounty let him there be fed,
And bless the hand that stretches forth the bread.
To wipe the tears from all afflicted eyes,
My will may covet, but my power denies.
If this raise anger in the stranger’s thought,
The pain of anger punishes the fault:
The very truth I undisguised declare;
For what so easy as to be sincere?”

To this Ulysses: “What the prince requires
Of swift removal, seconds my desires.
To want like mine the peopled town can yield
More hopes of comfort than the lonely field:
Nor fits my age to till the labour’d lands,
Or stoop to tasks a rural lord demands.
Adieu! but since this ragged garb can bear
So ill the inclemencies of morning air,
A few hours’ space permit me here to stay:
My steps Eumaeus shall to town convey,
With riper beams when Phœbus warms the day.”

Thus he: nor aught Telemachus replied,
But left the mansion with a lofty stride:
Schemes of revenge his pondering breast elate,
Revolving deep the suitors’ sudden fate,
Arriving now before the imperial hall,
He props his spear against the pillar’d wall;
Then like a lion o’er the threshold bounds;
The marble pavement with his steps resounds:
His eye first glanced where Euryclea spreads
With furry spoils of beasts the splendid beds:
She saw, she wept, she ran with eager pace,
And reach’d her master with a long embrace.
All crowded round, the family appears
With wild entrancement, and ecstatic tears.
Swift from above descends the royal fair
(Her beauteous cheeks the blush of Venus wear,
Chasten’d with coy Diana’s pensive air);
Hangs o’er her son, in his embraces dies;
Rains kisses on his neck, his face, his eyes:
Few words she spoke, though much she had to say;
And scarce those few, for tears, could force their way.

“Light of my eyes: he comes! unhoped-for joy!
Has Heaven from Pylos brought my lovely boy?
So snatch’d from all our cares!—Tell, hast thou known
Thy father’s fate, and tell me all thy own.”

“Oh dearest! most revered of womankind!
Cease with those tears to melt a manly mind
(Replied the prince); nor be our fates deplored,
From death and treason to thy arms restored.
Go bathe, and robed in white ascend the towers;
With all thy handmaids thank the immortal powers;
To every god vow hecatombs to bleed.
And call Jove’s vengeance on their guilty deed.
While to the assembled council I repair:
A stranger sent by Heaven attends me there;
My new accepted guest I haste to find,
Now to Peiraeus’ honour’d charge consign’d.”

The matron heard, nor was his word in vain.
She bathed; and, robed in white, with all her train,
To every god vow’d hecatombs to bleed,
And call’d Jove’s vengeance on the guilty deed,
Arm’d with his lance, the prince then pass’d the gate,
Two dogs behind, a faithful guard, await;
Pallas his form with grace divine improves:
The gazing crowd admires him as he moves.
Him, gathering round, the haughty suitors greet
With semblance fair, but inward deep deceit,
Their false addresses, generous, he denied.
Pass’d on, and sate by faithful Mentor’s side;
With Antiphus, and Halitherses sage
(His father’s counsellors, revered for age).
Of his own fortunes, and Ulysses’ fame,
Much ask’d the seniors; till Peiraeus came.
The stranger-guest pursued him close behind;
Whom when Telemachus beheld, he join’d.
He (when Peiraeus ask’d for slaves to bring
The gifts and treasures of the Spartan king)
Thus thoughtful answer’d: “Those we shall not move,
Dark and unconscious of the will of Jove;
We know not yet the full event of all:
Stabb’d in his palace if your prince must fall,
Us, and our house, if treason must o’erthrow,
Better a friend possess them than a foe;
If death to these, and vengeance Heaven decree,
Riches are welcome then, not else, to me.
Till then retain the gifts.”—The hero said,
And in his hand the willing stranger led.
Then disarray’d, the shining bath they sought
(With unguents smooth) of polish’d marble wrought:
Obedient handmaids with assistant toil
Supply the limpid wave, and fragrant oil:
Then o’er their limbs refulgent robes they threw,
And fresh from bathing to their seats withdrew.
The golden ewer a nymph attendant brings,
Replenish’d from the pure translucent springs;
With copious streams that golden ewer supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash: the table, in fair order spread,
Is piled with viands and the strength of bread.
Full opposite, before the folding gate,
The pensive mother sits in humble state;
Lowly she sate, and with dejected view
The fleecy threads her ivory fingers drew.
The prince and stranger shared the genial feast,
Till now the rage of thirst and hunger ceased.

When thus the queen: “My son! my only friend!
Say, to my mournful couch shall I ascend?
(The couch deserted now a length of years;
The couch for ever water’d with my tears;)
Say, wilt thou not (ere yet the suitor crew
Return, and riot shakes our walls anew),
Say, wilt thou not the least account afford?
The least glad tidings of my absent lord?”

To her the youth. “We reach’d the Pylian plains,
Where Nestor, shepherd of his people, reigns.
All arts of tenderness to him are known,
Kind to Ulysses’ race as to his own;
No father with a fonder grasp of joy
Strains to his bosom his long-absent boy.
But all unknown, if yet Ulysses breathe,
Or glide a spectre in the realms beneath;
For farther search, his rapid steeds transport
My lengthen’d journey to the Spartan court.
There Argive Helen I beheld, whose charms
(So Heaven decreed) engaged the great in arms.
My cause of coming told, he thus rejoin’d;
And still his words live perfect in my mind:

“‘Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero’s nuptial joys profane
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion’s court invades,
Leaves in that fatal lair her tender fawns,
And climbs the cliffs, or feeds along the lawns;
Meantime returning, with remorseless sway
The monarch savage rends the panting prey:
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Shall great Ulysses reassert his claim.
O Jove! supreme! whom men and gods revere;
And thou whose lustre gilds the rolling sphere!
With power congenial join’d, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when, contending on the Lesbian shore,
His prowess Philomelides confess’d,
And loud acclaiming Greeks the victor bless’d:
Then soon the invaders of his bed, and throne,
Their love presumptuous shall by death atone.
Now what you question of my ancient friend,
With truth I answer; thou the truth attend.
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate
Sole in an isle, imprison’d by the main,
The sad survivor of his numerous train,
Ulysses lies; detain’d by magic charms,
And press’d unwilling in Calypso’s arms.
No sailors there, no vessels to convey,
No oars to cut the immeasurable way.’
This told Atrides, and he told no more.
Then safe I voyaged to my native shore.”

He ceased; nor made the pensive queen reply,
But droop’d her head, and drew a secret sigh.
When Theoclymenus the seer began:
“O suffering consort of the suffering man!
What human knowledge could, those kings might tell,
But I the secrets of high heaven reveal.
Before the first of gods be this declared,
Before the board whose blessings we have shared;
Witness the genial rites, and witness all
This house holds sacred in her ample wall!
E’en now, this instant, great Ulysses, laid
At rest, or wandering in his country’s shade,
Their guilty deeds, in hearing, and in view,
Secret revolves; and plans the vengeance due.
Of this sure auguries the gods bestow’d,
When first our vessel anchor’d in your road.”
“Succeed those omens, Heaven! (the queen rejoin’d)
So shall our bounties speak a grateful mind;
And every envied happiness attend
The man who calls Penelope his friend.”
Thus communed they: while in the marble court
(Scene of their insolence) the lords resort:
Athwart the spacious square each tries his art,
To whirl the disk, or aim the missile dart.
Now did the hour of sweet repast arrive,
And from the field the victim flocks they drive:
Medon the herald (one who pleased them best,
And honour’d with a portion of their feast),
To bid the banquet, interrupts their play:
Swift to the hall they haste; aside they lay
Their garments, and succinct the victims slay.
Then sheep, and goats, and bristly porkers bled,
And the proud steer was o’er the marble spread.
While thus the copious banquet they provide,
Along the road, conversing side by side,
Proceed Ulysses and the faithful swain;
When thus Eumaeus, generous and humane:
“To town, observant of our lord’s behest,
Now let us speed; my friend no more my guest!
Yet like myself I wish thee here preferr’d,
Guard of the flock, or keeper of the herd,
But much to raise my master’s wrath I fear;
The wrath of princes ever is severe.
Then heed his will, and be our journey made
While the broad beams of Phœbus are display’d,
Or ere brown evening spreads her chilly shade.”
“Just thy advice (the prudent chief rejoin’d),
And such as suits the dictate of my mind.
Lead on: but help me to some staff to stay
My feeble step, since rugged is the way.”
Across his shoulders then the scrip he flung,
Wide-patch’d, and fasten’d by a twisted thong.
A staff Eumaeus gave. Along the way
Cheerly they fare: behind, the keepers stay:
These with their watchful dogs (a constant guard)
Supply his absence, and attend the herd.
And now his city strikes the monarch’s eyes,
Alas! how changed! a man of miseries;
Propp’d on a staff, a beggar old and bare
In rags dishonest fluttering with the air!
Now pass’d the rugged road, they journey down
The cavern’d way descending to the town,
Where, from the rock, with liquid drops distils
A limpid fount; that spread in parting rills
Its current thence to serve the city brings;
An useful work, adorn’d by ancient kings.
Neritus, Ithacus, Polyctor, there,
In sculptured stone immortalized their care,
In marble urns received it from above,
And shaded with a green surrounding grove;
Where silver alders, in high arches twined,
Drink the cool stream, and tremble to the wind.
Beneath, sequester’d to the nymphs, is seen
A mossy altar, deep embower’d in green;
Where constant vows by travellers are paid,
And holy horrors solemnize the shade.

Here with his goats (not vow’d to sacred fame,
But pamper’d luxury) Melanthius came:
Two grooms attend him. With an envious look
He eyed the stranger, and imperious spoke:

“The good old proverb how this pair fulfil!
One rogue is usher to another still.
Heaven with a secret principle endued
Mankind, to seek their own similitude.
Where goes the swineherd with that ill-look’d guest?
That giant-glutton, dreadful at a feast!
Full many a post have those broad shoulders worn,
From every great man’s gate repulsed with scorn:
To no brave prize aspired the worthless swain,
’Twas but for scraps he ask’d, and ask’d in vain.
To beg, than work, he better understands,
Or we perhaps might take him off thy hands.
For any office could the slave be good,
To cleanse the fold, or help the kids to food.
If any labour those big joints could learn,
Some whey, to wash his bowels, he might earn.
To cringe, to whine, his idle hands to spread,
Is all, by which that graceless maw is fed.
Yet hear me! if thy impudence but dare
Approach yon wall, I prophesy thy fare:
Dearly, full dearly, shalt thou buy thy bread
With many a footstool thundering at thy head.”

He thus: nor insolent of word alone,
Spurn’d with his rustic heel his king unknown;
Spurn’d, but not moved: he like a pillar stood,
Nor stirr’d an inch, contemptuous, from the road:
Doubtful, or with his staff to strike him dead,
Or greet the pavement with his worthless head.
Short was that doubt; to quell his rage inured,
The hero stood self-conquer’d, and endured.
But hateful of the wretch, Eumaeus heaved
His hands obtesting, and this prayer conceived:
“Daughters of Jove! who from the ethereal bowers
Descend to swell the springs, and feed the flowers!
Nymphs of this fountain! to whose sacred names
Our rural victims mount in blazing flames!
To whom Ulysses’ piety preferr’d
The yearly firstlings of his flock and herd;
Succeed my wish, your votary restore:
Oh, be some god his convoy to our shore!
Due pains shall punish then this slave’s offence,
And humble all his airs of insolence,
Who, proudly stalking, leaves the herds at large,
Commences courtier, and neglects his charge.”

“What mutters he? (Melanthius sharp rejoins;)
This crafty miscreant, big with dark designs?
The day shall come—nay, ’tis already near—
When, slave! to sell thee at a price too dear
Must be my care; and hence transport thee o’er,
A load and scandal to this happy shore.
Oh! that as surely great Apollo’s dart,
Or some brave suitor’s sword, might pierce the heart
Of the proud son; as that we stand this hour
In lasting safety from the father’s power!”

So spoke the wretch, but, shunning farther fray,
Turn’d his proud step, and left them on their way.
Straight to the feastful palace he repair’d,
Familiar enter’d, and the banquet shared;
Beneath Eurymachus, his patron lord,
He took his place, and plenty heap’d the board.

Meantime they heard, soft circling in the sky
Sweet airs ascend, and heavenly minstrelsy
(For Phemius to the lyre attuned the strain):
Ulysses hearken’d, then address’d the swain:

“Well may this palace admiration claim,
Great and respondent to the master’s fame!
Stage above stage the imperial structure stands,
Holds the chief honours, and the town commands:
High walls and battlements the courts inclose,
And the strong gates defy a host of foes.
Far other cares its dwellers now employ;
The throng’d assembly and the feast of joy:
I see the smokes of sacrifice aspire,
And hear (what graces every feast) the lyre.”

Then thus Eumaeus: “Judge we which were best;
Amidst yon revellers a sudden guest
Choose you to mingle, while behind I stay?
Or I first entering introduce the way?
Wait for a space without, but wait not long;
This is the house of violence and wrong:
Some rude insult thy reverend age may bear;
For like their lawless lords the servants are.”

“Just is, O friend! thy caution, and address’d
(Replied the chief, to no unheedful breast:)
The wrongs and injuries of base mankind
Fresh to my sense, and always in my mind.
The bravely-patient to no fortune yields:
On rolling oceans, and in fighting fields,
Storms have I pass’d, and many a stern debate;
And now in humbler scene submit to fate.
What cannot want? The best she will expose,
And I am learn’d in all her train of woes;
She fills with navies, hosts, and loud alarms,
The sea, the land, and shakes the world with arms!”

Thus, near the gates conferring as they drew,
Argus, the dog, his ancient master knew:
He not unconscious of the voice and tread,
Lifts to the sound his ear, and rears his head;
Bred by Ulysses, nourish’d at his board,
But, ah! not fated long to please his lord;
To him, his swiftness and his strength were vain;
The voice of glory call’d him o’er the main.
Till then in every sylvan chase renown’d,
With Argus, Argus, rung the woods around;
With him the youth pursued the goat or fawn,
Or traced the mazy leveret o’er the lawn.
Now left to man’s ingratitude he lay,
Unhoused, neglected in the public way;
And where on heaps the rich manure was spread,
Obscene with reptiles, took his sordid bed.

He knew his lord; he knew, and strove to meet;
In vain he strove to crawl and kiss his feet;
Yet (all he could) his tail, his tears, his eyes,
Salute his master, and confess his joys.
Soft pity touch’d the mighty master’s soul;
Adown his cheek a tear unbidden stole,
Stole unperceived: he turn’d his head and dried
The drop humane: then thus impassion’d cried:

“What noble beast in this abandon’d state
Lies here all helpless at Ulysses’ gate?
His bulk and beauty speak no vulgar praise:
If, as he seems, he was in better days,
Some care his age deserves; or was he prized
For worthless beauty? therefore now despised;
Such dogs and men there are, mere things of state;
And always cherish’d by their friends, the great.”

“Not Argus so, (Eumaeus thus rejoin’d,)
But served a master of a nobler kind,
Who, never, never shall behold him more!
Long, long since perish’d on a distant shore!
Oh had you seen him, vigorous, bold, and young,
Swift as a stag, and as a lion strong:
Him no fell savage on the plain withstood,
None ’scaped him bosom’d in the gloomy wood;
His eye how piercing, and his scent how true,
To wind the vapour on the tainted dew!
Such, when Ulysses left his natal coast:
Now years unnerve him, and his lord is lost!
The women keep the generous creature bare,
A sleek and idle race is all their care:
The master gone, the servants what restrains?
Or dwells humanity where riot reigns?
Jove fix’d it certain, that whatever day
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away.”

This said, the honest herdsman strode before;
The musing monarch pauses at the door:
The dog, whom Fate had granted to behold
His lord, when twenty tedious years had roll’d,
Takes a last look, and having seen him, dies;
So closed for ever faithful Argus’ eyes!

And now Telemachus, the first of all,
Observed Eumaeus entering in the hall;
Distant he saw, across the shady dome;
Then gave a sign, and beckon’d him to come:
There stood an empty seat, where late was placed,
In order due, the steward of the feast,
(Who now was busied carving round the board,)
Eumaeus took, and placed it near his lord.
Before him instant was the banquet spread,
And the bright basket piled with loaves of bread.

Next came Ulysses lowly at the door,
A figure despicable, old, and poor.
In squalid vests, with many a gaping rent,
Propp’d on a staff, and trembling as he went.
Then, resting on the threshold of the gate,
Against a cypress pillar lean’d his weight
Smooth’d by the workman to a polish’d plane);
The thoughtful son beheld, and call’d his swain

“These viands, and this bread, Eumaeus! bear,
And let yon mendicant our plenty share:
And let him circle round the suitors’ board,
And try the bounty of each gracious lord.
Bold let him ask, encouraged thus by me:
How ill, alas! do want and shame agree!”

His lord’s command the faithful servant bears:
The seeming beggar answers with his prayers:
“Bless’d be Telemachus! in every deed
Inspire him. Jove! in every wish succeed!”
This said, the portion from his son convey’d
With smiles receiving on his scrip he laid.
Long has the minstrel swept the sounding wire,
He fed, and ceased when silence held the lyre.
Soon as the suitors from the banquet rose,
Minerva prompts the man of mighty woes
To tempt their bounties with a suppliant’s art,
And learn the generous from the ignoble heart
(Not but his soul, resentful as humane,
Dooms to full vengeance all the offending train);
With speaking eyes, and voice of plaintive sound,
Humble he moves, imploring all around.
The proud feel pity, and relief bestow,
With such an image touch’d of human woe;
Inquiring all, their wonder they confess,
And eye the man, majestic in distress.

While thus they gaze and question with their eyes,
The bold Melanthius to their thought replies:
“My lords! this stranger of gigantic port
The good Eumaeus usher’d to your court.
Full well I mark’d the features of his face,
Though all unknown his clime, or noble race.”

“And is this present, swineherd! of thy band?
Bring’st thou these vagrants to infest the land?
(Returns Antinous with retorted eye)
Objects uncouth, to check the genial joy.
Enough of these our court already grace;
Of giant stomach, and of famish’d face.
Such guests Eumaeus to his country brings,
To share our feast, and lead the life of kings.”

To whom the hospitable swain rejoins:
“Thy passion, prince, belies thy knowing mind.
Who calls, from distant nations to his own,
The poor, distinguish’d by their wants alone?
Round the wide world are sought those men divine
Who public structures raise, or who design;
Those to whose eyes the gods their ways reveal,
Or bless with salutary arts to heal;
But chief to poets such respect belongs,
By rival nations courted for their songs;
These states invite, and mighty kings admire,
Wide as the sun displays his vital fire.
It is not so with want! how few that feed
A wretch unhappy, merely for his need!
Unjust to me, and all that serve the state,
To love Ulysses is to raise thy hate.
For me, suffice the approbation won
Of my great mistress, and her godlike son.”

To him Telemachus: “No more incense
The man by nature prone to insolence:
Injurious minds just answers but provoke”—
Then turning to Antinous, thus he spoke:
“Thanks to thy care! whose absolute command
Thus drives the stranger from our court and land.
Heaven bless its owner with a better mind!
From envy free, to charity inclined.
This both Penelope and I afford:
Then, prince! be bounteous of Ulysses’ board.
To give another’s is thy hand so slow?
So much more sweet to spoil than to bestow?”

“Whence, great Telemachus! this lofty strain?
(Antinous cries with insolent disdain):
Portions like mine if every suitor gave,
Our walls this twelvemonth should not see the slave.”

He spoke, and lifting high above the board
His ponderous footstool, shook it at his lord.
The rest with equal hand conferr’d the bread:
He fill’d his scrip, and to the threshold sped;
But first before Antinous stopp’d, and said:
“Bestow, my friend! thou dost not seem the worst
Of all the Greeks, but prince-like and the first;
Then, as in dignity, be first in worth,
And I shall praise thee through the boundless earth.
Once I enjoy’d in luxury of state
Whate’er gives man the envied name of great;
Wealth, servants, friends, were mine in better days
And hospitality was then my praise;
In every sorrowing soul I pour’d delight,
And poverty stood smiling in my sight.
But Jove, all-governing, whose only will
Determines fate, and mingles good with ill,
Sent me (to punish my pursuit of gain)
With roving pirates o’er the Egyptian main
By Egypt’s silver flood our ships we moor;
Our spies commission’d straight the coast explore;
But impotent of mind, the lawless will
The country ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumults rise:
The reddening dawn reveals the hostile fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and gleaming shields:
Jove thunder’d on their side: our guilty head
We turn’d to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lay dead.
Some few the foe in servitude detain;
Death ill exchanged for bondage and for pain!
Unhappy me a Cyprian took aboard,
And gave to Dmetor, Cyprus’ haughty lord:
Hither, to ’scape his chains, my course I steer,
Still cursed by Fortune, and insulted here!”

To whom Antinous thus his rage express’d:
“What god has plagued us with this gourmand guest?
Unless at distance, wretch! thou keep behind,
Another isle, than Cyprus more unkind,
Another Egypt shalt thou quickly find.
From all thou begg’st, a bold audacious slave;
Nor all can give so much as thou canst crave.
Nor wonder I, at such profusion shown;
Shameless they give, who give what’s not their own.”

The chief, retiring: “Souls, like that in thee,
Ill suits such forms of grace and dignity.
Nor will that hand to utmost need afford
The smallest portion of a wasteful board,
Whose luxury whole patrimonies sweeps,
Yet starving want, amidst the riot, weeps.”

The haughty suitor with resentment burns,
And, sourly smiling, this reply returns:
“Take that, ere yet thou quit this princely throng;
And dumb for ever be thy slanderous tongue!”
He said, and high the whirling tripod flung.
His shoulder-blade received the ungentle shock;
He stood, and moved not, like a marble rock;
But shook his thoughtful head, nor more complain’d,
Sedate of soul, his character sustain’d,
And inly form’d revenge; then back withdrew:
Before his feet the well fill’d scrip he threw,
And thus with semblance mild address’d the crew:

“May what I speak your princely minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in this noble love!
Not for the hurt I grieve, but for the cause.
If, when the sword our country’s quarrel draws,
Or if, defending what is justly dear,
From Mars impartial some broad wound we bear,
The generous motive dignifies the scar.
But for mere want, how hard to suffer wrong!
Want brings enough of other ills along!
Yet, if injustice never be secure,
If fiends revenge, and gods assert the poor,
Death shall lay low the proud aggressor’s head,
And make the dust Antinous’ bridal bed.”

“Peace, wretch! and eat thy bread without offence
(The suitor cried), or force shall drag thee hence,
Scourge through the public street, and cast thee there,
A mangled carcase for the hounds to tear.”

His furious deed the general anger moved,
All, even the worst, condemn’d; and some reproved.
“Was ever chief for wars like these renown’d?
Ill fits the stranger and the poor to wound.
Unbless’d thy hand! if in this low disguise
Wander, perhaps, some inmate of the skies;
They (curious oft of mortal actions) deign
In forms like these to round the earth and main,
Just and unjust recording in their mind,
And with sure eyes inspecting all mankind.”

Telemachus, absorb’d in thought severe,
Nourish’d deep anguish, though he shed no tear;
But the dark brow of silent sorrow shook:
While thus his mother to her virgins spoke:

“On him and his may the bright god of day
That base, inhospitable blow repay!”
The nurse replies: “If Jove receives my prayer,
Not one survives to breathe to-morrow’s air.”

“All, all are foes, and mischief is their end;
Antinous most to gloomy death a friend
(Replies the queen): the stranger begg’d their grace,
And melting pity soften’d every face;
From every other hand redress he found,
But fell Antinous answer’d with a wound.”
Amidst her maids thus spoke the prudent queen,
Then bade Eumaeus call the pilgrim in.
“Much of the experienced man I long to hear,
If or his certain eye, or listening ear,
Have learn’d the fortunes of my wandering lord?”
Thus she, and good Eumaeus took the word:

“A private audience if thy grace impart,
The stranger’s words may ease the royal heart.
His sacred eloquence in balm distils,
And the soothed heart with secret pleasure fills.
Three days have spent their beams, three nights have run
Their silent journey, since his tale begun,
Unfinish’d yet; and yet I thirst to hear!
As when some heaven-taught poet charms the ear
(Suspending sorrow with celestial strain
Breathed from the gods to soften human pain)
Time steals away with unregarded wing,
And the soul hears him, though he cease to sing

“Ulysses late he saw, on Cretan ground
(His fathers guest), for Minos’ birth renown’d.
He now but waits the wind to waft him o’er,
With boundless treasure, from Thesprotia’s shore.”

To this the queen: “The wanderer let me hear,
While yon luxurious race indulge their cheer,
Devour the grazing ox, and browsing goat,
And turn my generous vintage down their throat.
For where’s an arm, like thine, Ulysses! strong,
To curb wild riot, and to punish wrong?”

She spoke. Telemachus then sneezed aloud;
Constrain’d, his nostril echoed through the crowd.
The smiling queen the happy omen bless’d:

“So may these impious fall, by Fate oppress’d!”
Then to Eumaeus: “Bring the stranger, fly!
And if my questions meet a true reply,
Graced with a decent robe he shall retire,
A gift in season which his wants require.”

Thus spoke Penelope. Eumaeus flies
In duteous haste, and to Ulysses cries:
“The queen invites thee, venerable guest!
A secret instinct moves her troubled breast,
Of her long absent lord from thee to gain
Some light, and soothe her soul’s eternal pain.
If true, if faithful thou, her grateful mind
Of decent robes a present has design’d:
So finding favour in the royal eye,
Thy other wants her subjects shall supply.”

“Fair truth alone (the patient man replied)
My words shall dictate, and my lips shall guide.
To him, to me, one common lot was given,
In equal woes, alas! involved by Heaven.
Much of his fates I know; but check’d by fear
I stand; the hand of violence is here:
Here boundless wrongs the starry skies invade,
And injured suppliants seek in vain for aid.
Let for a space the pensive queen attend,
Nor claim my story till the sun descend;
Then in such robes as suppliants may require,
Composed and cheerful by the genial fire,
When loud uproar and lawless riot cease,
Shall her pleased ear receive my words in peace.”

Swift to the queen returns the gentle swain:
“And say (she cries), does fear or shame detain
The cautious stranger? With the begging kind
Shame suits but ill.” Eumaeus thus rejoin’d:

“He only asks a more propitious hour,
And shuns (who would not?) wicked men in power;
At evening mild (meet season to confer)
By turns to question, and by turns to hear.”

“Whoe’er this guest (the prudent queen replies)
His every step and every thought is wise.
For men like these on earth he shall not find
In all the miscreant race of human kind.”
Thus she. Eumaeus all her words attends,
And, parting, to the suitor powers descends;
There seeks Telemachus, and thus apart
In whispers breathes the fondness of his heart:

“The time, my lord, invites me to repair
Hence to the lodge; my charge demands my care.
These sons of murder thirst thy life to take;
O guard it, guard it, for thy servant’s sake!”

“Thanks to my friend (he cries): but now the hour
Of night draws on, go seek the rural bower:
But first refresh: and at the dawn of day
Hither a victim to the gods convey.
Our life to Heaven’s immortal powers we trust,
Safe in their care, for Heaven protects the just.”

Observant of his voice, Eumaeus sate
And fed recumbent on a chair of state.
Then instant rose, and as he moved along,
’Twas riot all amid the suitor throng,
They feast, they dance, and raise the mirthful song
Till now, declining towards the close of day,
The sun obliquely shot his dewy ray.




BOOK XVIII.


ARGUMENT.
THE FIGHT OF ULYSSES AND IRUS.


The beggar Irus insults Ulysses; the suitors promote the quarrel, in
which Irus is worsted, and miserably handled. Penelope descends, and
receives the presents of the suitors. The dialogue of Ulysses with
Eurymachus.


While fix’d in thought the pensive hero sate,
A mendicant approach’d the royal gate;
A surly vagrant of the giant kind,
The stain of manhood, of a coward mind:
From feast to feast, insatiate to devour,
He flew, attendant on the genial hour.
Him on his mother’s knees, when babe he lay,
She named Arnaeus on his natal day:
But Irus his associates call’d the boy,
Practised the common messenger to fly;
Irus, a name expressive of the employ.

From his own roof, with meditated blows,
He strove to drive the man of mighty woes:

“Hence, dotard! hence, and timely speed thy way,
Lest dragg’d in vengeance thou repent thy stay;
See how with nods assent yon princely train!
But honouring age, in mercy I refrain:
In peace away! lest, if persuasions fail,
This arm with blows more eloquent prevail.”
To whom, with stern regard: “O insolence,
Indecently to rail without offence!
What bounty gives without a rival share;
I ask, what harms not thee, to breathe this air:
Alike on alms we both precarious live:
And canst thou envy when the great relieve?
Know, from the bounteous heavens all riches flow,
And what man gives, the gods by man bestow;
Proud as thou art, henceforth no more be proud,
Lest I imprint my vengeance in thy blood;
Old as I am, should once my fury burn,
How would’st thou fly, nor e’en in thought return!”

“Mere woman-glutton! (thus the churl replied;)
A tongue so flippant, with a throat so wide!
Why cease I, gods! to dash those teeth away,
Like some wild boar’s, that, greedy of his prey,
Uproots the bearded corn? Rise, try the fight,
Gird well thy loins, approach, and feel my might:
Sure of defeat, before the peers engage:
Unequal fight, when youth contends with age!”

Thus in a wordy war their tongues display
More fierce intents, preluding to the fray;
Antinous hears, and in a jovial vein,
Thus with loud laughter to the suitor train:

“This happy day in mirth, my friends, employ,
And lo! the gods conspire to crown our joy;
See ready for the fight, and hand to hand,
Yon surly mendicants contentious stand:
Why urge we not to blows!” Well pleased they spring
Swift from their seats, and thickening form a ring.

To whom Antinous: “Lo! enrich’d with blood,
A kid’s well-fatted entrails (tasteful food)
On glowing embers lie; on him bestow
The choicest portion who subdues his foe;
Grant him unrivall’d in these walls to stay,
The sole attendant on the genial day.”

The lords applaud: Ulysses then with art,
And fears well-feign’d, disguised his dauntless heart.

“Worn as I am with age, decay’d with woe;
Say, is it baseness to decline the foe?
Hard conflict! when calamity and age
With vigorous youth, unknown to cares, engage!
Yet, fearful of disgrace, to try the day
Imperious hunger bids, and I obey;
But swear, impartial arbiters of right,
Swear to stand neutral, while we cope in fight.”

The peers assent: when straight his sacred head
Telemachus upraised, and sternly said:
“Stranger, if prompted to chastise the wrong
Of this bold insolent, confide, be strong!
The injurious Greek that dares attempt a blow,
That instant makes Telemachus his foe;
And these my friends shall guard the sacred ties
Of hospitality, for they are wise.”

Then, girding his strong loins, the king prepares
To close in combat, and his body bares;
Broad spread his shoulders, and his nervous thighs
By just degrees, like well-turn’d columns, rise
Ample his chest, his arms are round and long,
And each strong joint Minerva knits more strong
(Attendant on her chief): the suitor-crowd
With wonder gaze, and gazing speak aloud:
“Irus! alas! shall Irus be no more?
Black fate impends, and this the avenging hour!
Gods! how his nerves a matchless strength proclaim,
Swell o’er his well-strong limbs, and brace his frame!”

Then pale with fears, and sickening at the sight;
They dragg’d the unwilling Irus to the fight;
From his blank visage fled the coward blood,
And his flesh trembled as aghast he stood.

“O that such baseness should disgrace the light?
O hide it, death, in everlasting night!
(Exclaims Antinous;) can a vigorous foe
Meanly decline to combat age and woe?
But hear me wretch! if recreant in the fray
That huge bulk yield this ill-contested day,
Instant thou sail’st, to Eschetus resign’d;
A tyrant, fiercest of the tyrant kind,
Who casts thy mangled ears and nose a prey
To hungry dogs, and lops the man away.”

While with indignant scorn he sternly spoke,
In every joint the trembling Irus shook.
Now front to front each frowning champion stands,
And poises high in air his adverse hands.
The chief yet doubts, or to the shades below
To fell the giant at one vengeful blow,
Or save his life, and soon his life to save
The king resolves, for mercy sways the brave
That instant Irus his huge arm extends,
Full on his shoulder the rude weight descends;
The sage Ulysses, fearful to disclose
The hero latent in the man of woes,
Check’d half his might; yet rising to the stroke,
His jawbone dash’d, the crashing jawbone broke:
Down dropp’d he stupid from the stunning wound;
His feet extended quivering, beat the ground;
His mouth and nostrils spout a purple flood;
His teeth, all shatter’d, rush inmix’d with blood.

The peers transported, as outstretch’d he lies,
With bursts of laughter rend the vaulted skies;
Then dragg’d along, all bleeding from the wound,
His length of carcase trailing prints the ground:
Raised on his feet, again he reels, he falls,
Till propp’d, reclining on the palace walls:
Then to his hand a staff the victor gave,
And thus with just reproach address’d the slave:
“There terrible, affright with dogs, and reign
A dreaded tyrant o’er the bestial train!
But mercy to the poor and stranger show,
Lest Heaven in vengeance send some mightier woe.”

Scornful he spoke, and o’er his shoulder flung
The broad-patch’d scrip in tatters hung
Ill join’d, and knotted to a twisted thong.
Then, turning short, disdain’d a further stay;
But to the palace measured back the way.
There, as he rested gathering in a ring,
The peers with smiles address’d their unknown king:
“Stranger, may Jove and all the aërial powers
With every blessing crown thy happy hours!
Our freedom to thy prowess’d arm we owe
From bold intrusion of thy coward foe:
Instant the flying sail the slave shall wing
To Eschetus, the monster of a king.”

While pleased he hears, Antinous bears the food,
A kid’s well-fatted entrails, rich with blood;
The bread from canisters of shining mould
Amphinomus; and wines that laugh in gold:
“And oh! (he mildly cries) may Heaven display
A beam of glory o’er thy future day!
Alas, the brave too oft is doom’d to bear
The gripes of poverty and stings of care.”

To whom with thought mature the king replies:
“The tongue speaks wisely, when the soul is wise:
Such was thy father! in imperial state,
Great without vice, that oft attends the great;
Nor from the sire art thou, the son, declin’d;
Then hear my words, and grace them in thy mind!
Of all that breathes, or grovelling creeps on earth,
Most vain is man! calamitous by birth:
To-day, with power elate, in strength he blooms;
The haughty creature on that power presumes:
Anon from Heaven a sad reverse he feels:
Untaught to bear, ’gainst Heaven the wretch rebels.
For man is changeful, as his bliss or woe!
Too high when prosperous, when distress’d too low.
There was a day, when with the scornful great
I swell’d in pomp and arrogance of state;
Proud of the power that to high birth belongs;
And used that power to justify my wrongs.
Then let not man be proud; but firm of mind,
Bear the best humbly; and the worst resign’d;
Be dumb when Heaven afflicts! unlike yon train
Of haughty spoilers, insolently vain;
Who make their queen and all her wealth a prey:
But vengeance and Ulysses wing their way.
O may’st thou, favour’d by some guardian power,
Far, far be distant in that deathful hour!
For sure I am, if stern Ulysses breathe,
These lawless riots end in blood and death.”

Then to the gods the rosy juice he pours,
And the drain’d goblet to the chief restores.
Stung to the soul, o’ercast with holy dread,
He shook the graceful honours of his head;
His boding mind the future woe forestalls,
In vain! by great Telemachus he falls,
For Pallas seals his doom: all sad he turns
To join the peers; resumes his throne, and mourns.

Meanwhile Minerva with instinctive fires
Thy soul, Penelope, from Heaven inspires;
With flattering hopes the suitors to betray,
And seem to meet, yet fly, the bridal day:
Thy husband’s wonder, and thy son’s to raise;
And crown the mother and the wife with praise.
Then, while the streaming sorrow dims her eyes,
Thus, with a transient smile, the matron cries:

“Eurynome! to go where riot reigns
I feel an impulse, though my soul disdains;
To my loved son the snares of death to show,
And in the traitor friend, unmask the foe;
Who, smooth of tongue, in purpose insincere,
Hides fraud in smiles, while death is ambush’d there.”

“Go, warn thy son, nor be the warning vain
(Replied the sagest of the royal train);
But bathed, anointed, and adorn’d, descend;
Powerful of charms, bid every grace attend;
The tide of flowing tears awhile suppress;
Tears but indulge the sorrow, not repress.
Some joy remains: to thee a son is given,
Such as, in fondness, parents ask of Heaven.”

“Ah me! forbear!” returns the queen, “forbear,
Oh! talk not, talk not of vain beauty’s care;
No more I bathe, since he no longer sees
Those charms, for whom alone I wish to please.
The day that bore Ulysses from this coast
Blasted the little bloom these cheeks could boast.
But instant bid Autonoe descend,
Instant Hippodame our steps attend;
Ill suits it female virtue, to be seen
Alone, indecent, in the walks of men.”

Then while Eurynome the mandate bears,
From heaven Minerva shoots with guardian cares;
O’er all her senses, as the couch she press’d,
She pours, a pleasing, deep and death-like rest,
With every beauty every feature arms,
Bids her cheeks glow, and lights up all her charms;
In her love-darting eyes awakes the fires
(Immortal gifts! to kindle soft desires);
From limb to limb an air majestic sheds,
And the pure ivory o’er her bosom spreads.
Such Venus shines, when with a measured bound
She smoothly gliding swims the harmonious round,
When with the Graces in the dance she moves,
And fires the gazing gods with ardent loves.

Then to the skies her flight Minerva bends,
And to the queen the damsel train descends;
Waked at their steps, her flowing eyes unclose;
The tears she wipes, and thus renews her woes:
“Howe’er ’tis well that sleep awhile can free,
With soft forgetfulness a wretch like me;
Oh! were it given to yield this transient breath,
Send, O Diana! send the sleep of death!
Why must I waste a tedious life in tears,
Nor bury in the silent grave my cares?
O my Ulysses! ever honour’d name!
For thee I mourn till death dissolves my frame.”

Thus wailing, slow and sadly she descends,
On either band a damsel train attends:
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Radiant before the gazing peers she stands;
A veil translucent o’er her brow display’d,
Her beauty seems, and only seems, to shade:
Sudden she lightens in their dazzled eyes,
And sudden flames in every bosom rise;
They send their eager souls with every look.
Till silence thus the imperial matron broke:

“O why! my son, why now no more appears
That warmth of soul that urged thy younger years?
Thy riper days no growing worth impart,
A man in stature, still a boy in heart!
Thy well-knit frame unprofitably strong,
Speaks thee a hero, from a hero sprung:
But the just gods in vain those gifts bestow,
O wise alone in form, and grave in show!
Heavens! could a stranger feel oppression’s hand
Beneath thy roof, and couldst thou tamely stand!
If thou the stranger’s righteous cause decline
His is the sufferance, but the shame is thine.”

To whom, with filial awe, the prince returns:
“That generous soul with just resentment burns;
Yet, taught by time, my heart has learn’d to glow
For others’ good, and melt at others’ woe;
But, impotent those riots to repel,
I bear their outrage, though my soul rebel;
Helpless amid the snares of death I tread,
And numbers leagued in impious union dread;
But now no crime is theirs: this wrong proceeds
From Irus, and the guilty Irus bleeds.
Oh would to Jove! or her whose arms display
The shield of Jove, or him who rules the day!
That yon proud suitors, who licentious tread
These courts, within these courts like Irus bled:
Whose loose head tottering, as with wine oppress’d,
Obliquely drops, and nodding knocks his breast;
Powerless to move, his staggering feet deny
The coward wretch the privilege to fly.”

Then to the queen Eurymachus replies:
“O justly loved, and not more fair than wise!
Should Greece through all her hundred states survey
Thy finish’d charms, all Greece would own thy sway
In rival crowds contest the glorious prize.
Dispeopling realms to gaze upon thy eyes:
O woman! loveliest of the lovely kind,
In body perfect, and complete in mind.”

“Ah me! (returns the queen) when from this shore
Ulysses sail’d, then beauty was no more!
The gods decreed these eyes no more should keep
Their wonted grace, but only serve to weep.
Should he return, whate’er my beauties prove,
My virtues last; my brightest charm is love.
Now, grief, thou all art mine! the gods o’ercast
My soul with woes, that long, ah long must last!
Too faithfully my heart retains the day
That sadly tore my royal lord away:
He grasp’d my hand, and, ‘O, my spouse! I leave
Thy arms (he cried), perhaps to find a grave:
Fame speaks the Trojans bold; they boast the skill
To give the feather’d arrow wings to kill,
To dart the spear, and guide the rushing car
With dreadful inroad through the walks of war.
My sentence is gone forth, and ’tis decreed
Perhaps by righteous Heaven that I must bleed!
My father, mother, all I trust to three;
To them, to them, transfer the love of me:
But, when my son grows man, the royal sway
Resign, and happy be thy bridal day!’
Such were his words; and Hymen now prepares
To light his torch, and give me up to cares;
The afflictive hand of wrathful Jove to bear:
A wretch the most complete that breathes the air!
Fall’n e’en below the rights to woman due!
Careless to please, with insolence ye woo!
The generous lovers, studious to succeed,
Bid their whole herds and flocks in banquets bleed;
By precious gifts the vow sincere display:
You, only you, make her ye love your prey.”

Well-pleased Ulysses hears his queen deceive
The suitor-train, and raise a thirst to give:
False hopes she kindles, but those hopes betray,
And promise, yet elude, the bridal day.

While yet she speaks, the gay Antinous cries:
“Offspring of kings, and more than woman wise!
’Tis right; ’tis man’s prerogative to give,
And custom bids thee without shame receive;
Yet never, never, from thy dome we move,
Till Hymen lights the torch of spousal love.”

The peers despatch’d their heralds to convey
The gifts of love; with speed they take the way.
A robe Antinous gives of shining dyes,
The varying hues in gay confusion rise
Rich from the artist’s hand! Twelve clasps of gold
Close to the lessening waist the vest infold!
Down from the swelling loins the vest unbound
Floats in bright waves redundant o’er the ground,
A bracelet rich with gold, with amber gay,
That shot effulgence like the solar ray,
Eurymachus presents: and ear-rings bright,
With triple stars, that cast a trembling light.
Pisander bears a necklace wrought with art:
And every peer, expressive of his heart,
A gift bestows: this done, the queen ascends,
And slow behind her damsel train attends.

Then to the dance they form the vocal strain,
Till Hesperus leads forth the starry train;
And now he raises, as the daylight fades,
His golden circlet in the deepening shades:
Three vases heap’d with copious fires display
O’er all the palace a fictitious day;
From space to space the torch wide-beaming burns,
And sprightly damsels trim the rays by turns.

To whom the king: “Ill suits your sex to stay
Alone with men! ye modest maids, away!
Go, with the queen; the spindle guide; or cull
(The partners of her cares) the silver wool;
Be it my task the torches to supply
E’en till the morning lamp adorns the sky;
E’en till the morning, with unwearied care,
Sleepless I watch; for I have learn’d to bear.”

Scornful they heard: Melantho, fair and young,
(Melantho, from the loins of Dolius sprung,
Who with the queen her years an infant led,
With the soft fondness of a daughter bred,)
Chiefly derides: regardless of the cares
Her queen endures, polluted joys she shares
Nocturnal with Eurymachus: with eyes
That speak disdain, the wanton thus replies:
“Oh! whither wanders thy distemper’d brain,
Thou bold intruder on a princely train?
Hence, to the vagrants’ rendezvous repair;
Or shun in some black forge the midnight air.
Proceeds this boldness from a turn of soul,
Or flows licentious from the copious bowl?
Is it that vanquish’d Irus swells thy mind?
A foe may meet thee of a braver kind,
Who, shortening with a storm of blows thy stay,
Shall send thee howling all in blood away!”

To whom with frowns: “O impudent in wrong!
Thy lord shall curb that insolence of tongue;
Know, to Telemachus I tell the offence;
The scourge, the scourge shall lash thee into sense.”

With conscious shame they hear the stern rebuke,
Nor longer durst sustain the sovereign look.

Then to the servile task the monarch turns
His royal hands: each torch refulgent burns
With added day: meanwhile in museful mood,
Absorb’d in thought, on vengeance fix’d he stood.
And now the martial maid, by deeper wrongs
To rouse Ulysses, points the suitors’ tongues:
Scornful of age, to taunt the virtuous man,
Thoughtless and gay, Eurymachus began:

“Hear me (he cries), confederates and friends!
Some god, no doubt, this stranger kindly sends;
The shining baldness of his head survey,
It aids our torchlight, and reflects the ray.”

Then to the king that levell’d haughty Troy:
“Say, if large hire can tempt thee to employ
Those hands in work; to tend the rural trade,
To dress the walk, and form the embowering shade.
So food and raiment constant will I give:
But idly thus thy soul prefers to live,
And starve by strolling, not by work to thrive.”

To whom incensed: “Should we, O prince, engage
In rival tasks beneath the burning rage
Of summer suns; were both constrain’d to wield
Foodless the scythe along the burden’d field;
Or should we labour while the ploughshare wounds,
With steers of equal strength, the allotted grounds,
Beneath my labours, how thy wondering eyes
Might see the sable field at once arise!
Should Jove dire war unloose, with spear and shield,
And nodding helm, I tread the ensanguined field,
Fierce in the van: then wouldst thou, wouldst thou,—say,—
Misname me glutton, in that glorious day?
No, thy ill-judging thoughts the brave disgrace
’Tis thou injurious art, not I am base.
Proud to seem brave among a coward train!
But now, thou art not valorous, but vain.
God! should the stern Ulysses rise in might,
These gates would seem too narrow for thy flight.”

While yet he speaks, Eurymachus replies,
With indignation flashing from his eyes:

“Slave, I with justice might deserve the wrong,
Should I not punish that opprobrious tongue.
Irreverent to the great, and uncontroll’d,
Art thou from wine, or innate folly, bold?
Perhaps these outrages from Irus flow,
A worthless triumph o’er a worthless foe!”

He said, and with full force a footstool threw;
Whirl’d from his arm, with erring rage it flew:
Ulysses, cautious of the vengeful foe,
Stoops to the ground, and disappoints the blow.
Not so a youth, who deals the goblet round,
Full on his shoulder it inflicts a wound;
Dash’d from his hand the sounding goblet flies,
He shrieks, he reels, he falls, and breathless lies.
Then wild uproar and clamour mount the sky,
Till mutual thus the peers indignant cry:
“Oh had this stranger sunk to realms beneath,
To the black realms of darkness and of death,
Ere yet he trod these shores! to strife he draws
Peer against peer; and what the weighty cause?
A vagabond! for him the great destroy,
In vile ignoble jars, the feast of joy.”

To whom the stern Telemachus uprose;
“Gods! what wild folly from the goblet flows!
Whence this unguarded openness of soul,
But from the license of the copious bowl?
Or Heaven delusion sends: but hence away!
Force I forbear, and without force obey.”

Silent, abash’d, they hear the stern rebuke,
Till thus Amphinomus the silence broke:

“True are his words, and he whom truth offends,
Not with Telemachus, but truth contends;
Let not the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger, or the spotless maid;
Retire we hence, but crown with rosy wine
The flowing goblet to the powers divine!
Guard he his guest beneath whose roof he stands:
This justice, this the social rite demands.”

The peers assent: the goblet Mulius crown’d
With purple juice, and bore in order round:
Each peer successive his libation pours
To the blest gods who fill’d the ethereal bowers:
Then swill’d with wine, with noise the crowds obey,
And rushing forth, tumultuous reel away.




BOOK XIX.


ARGUMENT.
THE DISCOVERY OF ULYSSES TO EURYCLEA.


Ulysses and his son remove the weapons out of the armoury. Ulysses, in
conversation with Penelope, gives a fictitious account of his
adventures; then assures her he had formerly entertained her husband in
Crete; and describes exactly his person and dress; affirms to have
heard of him in Phæacia and Thesprotia, and that his return is
certain, and within a month. He then goes to bathe, and is attended by
Euryclea, who discovers him to be Ulysses by the scar upon his leg,
which he formerly received in hunting the wild boar on Parnassus. The
poet inserts a digression relating that accident, with all its
particulars.


Consulting secret with the blue-eyed maid,
Still in the dome divine Ulysses stay’d:
Revenge mature for act inflamed his breast;
And thus the son the fervent sire address’d:

“Instant convey those steely stores of war
To distant rooms, disposed with secret care:
The cause demanded by the suitor-train,
To soothe their fears, a specious reason feign:
Say, since Ulysses left his natal coast,
Obscene with smoke, their beamy lustre lost,
His arms deform the roof they wont adorn:
From the glad walls inglorious lumber torn.
Suggest, that Jove the peaceful thought inspired,
Lest they, by sight of swords to fury fired,
Dishonest wounds, or violence of soul,
Defame the bridal feast and friendly bowl.”

The prince, obedient to the sage command,
To Euryclea thus: “The female band
In their apartments keep; secure the doors;
These swarthy arms among the covert stores
Are seemlier hid; my thoughtless youth they blame,
Imbrown’d with vapour of the smouldering flame.”

“In happier hour (pleased Euryclea cries),
Tutour’d by early woes, grow early wise;
Inspect with sharpen’d sight, and frugal care,
Your patrimonial wealth, a prudent heir.
But who the lighted taper will provide
(The female train retired) your toils to guide?”

“Without infringing hospitable right,
This guest (he cried) shall bear the guiding light:
I cheer no lazy vagrants with repast;
They share the meal that earn it ere they taste.”

He said: from female ken she straight secures
The purposed deed, and guards the bolted doors:
Auxiliar to his son, Ulysses bears
The plumy-crested helms and pointed spears,
With shields indented deep in glorious wars.
Minerva viewless on her charge attends,
And with her golden lamp his toil befriends.
Not such the sickly beams, which unsincere
Gild the gross vapour of this nether sphere!
A present deity the prince confess’d,
And wrapp’d with ecstasy the sire address’d:

“What miracle thus dazzles with surprise!
Distinct in rows the radiant columns rise;
The walls, where’er my wondering sight I turn,
And roofs, amidst a blaze of glory burn!
Some visitant of pure ethereal race
With his bright presence deigns the dome to grace.”

“Be calm (replies the sire); to none impart,
But oft revolve the vision in thy heart:
Celestials, mantled in excess of light,
Can visit unapproach’d by mortal sight.
Seek thou repose: whilst here I sole remain,
To explore the conduct of the female train:
The pensive queen, perchance, desires to know
The series of my toils, to soothe her woe.”

With tapers flaming day his train attends,
His bright alcove the obsequious youth ascends:
Soft slumberous shades his drooping eyelids close,
Till on her eastern throne Aurora glows.

Whilst, forming plans of death, Ulysses stay’d,
In counsel secret with the martial maid,
Attendant nymphs in beauteous order wait
The queen, descending from her bower of state.
Her cheeks the warmer blush of Venus wear,
Chasten’d with coy Diana’s pensive air.
An ivory seat with silver ringlets graced,
By famed Icmalius wrought, the menials placed:
With ivory silver’d thick the footstool shone,
O’er which the panther’s various hide was thrown.
The sovereign seat with graceful air she press’d;
To different tasks their toil the nymphs address’d:
The golden goblets some, and some restored
From stains of luxury the polish’d board:
These to remove the expiring embers came,
While those with unctuous fir foment the flame.

’Twas then Melantho with imperious mien
Renew’d the attack, incontinent of spleen:
“Avaunt (she cried), offensive to my sight!
Deem not in ambush here to lurk by night,
Into the woman-state asquint to pry;
A day-devourer, and an evening spy!
Vagrant, begone! before this blazing brand
Shall urge”—and waved it hissing in her hand.

The insulted hero rolls his wrathful eyes
And “Why so turbulent of soul? (he cries;)
Can these lean shrivell’d limbs, unnerved with age,
These poor but honest rags, enkindle rage?
In crowds, we wear the badge of hungry fate:
And beg, degraded from superior state!
Constrain’d a rent-charge on the rich I live;
Reduced to crave the good I once could give:
A palace, wealth, and slaves, I late possess’d,
And all that makes the great be call’d the bless’d:
My gate, an emblem of my open soul,
Embraced the poor, and dealt a bounteous dole.
Scorn not the sad reverse, injurious maid!
’Tis Jove’s high will, and be his will obey’d!
Nor think thyself exempt: that rosy prime
Must share the general doom of withering time:
To some new channel soon the changeful tide
Of royal grace the offended queen may guide;
And her loved lord unplume thy towering pride.
Or, were he dead, ’tis wisdom to beware:
Sweet blooms the prince beneath Apollo’s care;
Your deeds with quick impartial eye surveys,
Potent to punish what he cannot praise.”

Her keen reproach had reach’d the sovereign’s ear:
“Loquacious insolent! (she cries,) forbear;
To thee the purpose of my soul I told;
Venial discourse, unblamed, with him to hold;
The storied labours of my wandering lord,
To soothe my grief he haply may record:
Yet him, my guest, thy venom’d rage hath stung;
Thy head shall pay the forfeit of thy tongue!
But thou on whom my palace cares depend,
Eurynome, regard the stranger-friend:
A seat, soft spread with furry spoils, prepare;
Due-distant for us both to speak, and hear.”

The menial fair obeys with duteous haste:
A seat adorn’d with furry spoils she placed:
Due-distant for discourse the hero sate;
When thus the sovereign from her chair of state:

“Reveal, obsequious to my first demand,
Thy name, thy lineage, and thy natal land.”

He thus: “O queen! whose far-resounding fame
Is bounded only by the starry frame,
Consummate pattern of imperial sway,
Whose pious rule a warlike race obey!
In wavy gold thy summer vales are dress’d;
Thy autumns bind with copious fruit oppress’d:
With flocks and herds each grassy plain is stored;
And fish of every fin thy seas afford:
Their affluent joys the grateful realms confess;
And bless the power that still delights to bless,
Gracious permit this prayer, imperial dame!
Forbear to know my lineage, or my name:
Urge not this breast to heave, these eyes to weep;
In sweet oblivion let my sorrows sleep!
My woes awaked, will violate your ear,
And to this gay censorious train appear
A whiny vapour melting in a tear.”

“Their gifts the gods resumed (the queen rejoin’d),
Exterior grace, and energy of mind,
When the dear partner of my nuptial joy,
Auxiliar troops combined, to conquer Troy.
My lord’s protecting hand alone would raise
My drooping verdure, and extend my praise!
Peers from the distant Samian shore resort:
Here with Dulichians join’d, besiege the court:
Zacynthus, green with ever-shady groves,
And Ithaca, presumptuous, boast their loves:
Obtruding on my choice a second lord,
They press the Hymenaean rite abhorr’d.
Misrule thus mingling with domestic cares,
I live regardless of my state affairs;
Receive no stranger-guest, no poor relieve;
But ever for my lord in secret grieve!—
This art, instinct by some celestial power,
I tried, elusive of the bridal hour:

“‘Ye peers, (I cry,) who press to gain a heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no future part;
Rebate your loves, each rival suit suspend,
Till this funeral web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A pall of state, the ornament of death.
For when to fate he bows, each Grecian dame
With just reproach were licensed to defame,
Should he, long honour’d in supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter’s hand.’
The fiction pleased; their loves I long elude;
The night still ravell’d what the day renew’d:
Three years successful in my heart conceal’d,
My ineffectual fraud the fourth reveal’d:
Befriended by my own domestic spies,
The woof unwrought the suitor-train surprise.
From nuptial rites they now no more recede,
And fear forbids to falsify the brede.
My anxious parents urge a speedy choice,
And to their suffrage gain the filial voice.
For rule mature, Telemachus deplores
His dome dishonour’d, and exhausted stores—
But, stranger! as thy days seem full of fate,
Divide discourse, in turn thy birth relate:
Thy port asserts thee of distinguish’d race;
No poor unfather’d product of disgrace.”

“Princess! (he cries,) renew’d by your command,
The dear remembrance of my native land
Of secret grief unseals the fruitful source;
Fond tears repeat their long-forgotten course!
So pays the wretch whom fate constrains to roam,
The dues of nature to his natal home!—
But inward on my soul let sorrow prey,
Your sovereign will my duty bids obey.

“Crete awes the circling waves, a fruitful soil!
And ninety cities crown the sea-born isle:
Mix’d with her genuine sons, adopted names
In various tongues avow their various claims:
Cydonians, dreadful with the bended yew,
And bold Pelasgi boast a native’s due:
The Dorians, plumed amid the files of war,
Her foodful glebe with fierce Achaians share;
Cnossus, her capital of high command;
Where sceptred Minos with impartial hand
Divided right: each ninth revolving year,
By Jove received in council to confer.
His son Deucalion bore successive sway:
His son, who gave me first to view the day!
The royal bed an elder issue bless’d,
Idomeneus whom Ilion fields attest
Of matchless deeds: untrain’d to martial toil,
I lived inglorious in my native isle,
Studious of peace, and Æthon is my name.
’Twas then to Crete the great Ulysses came.
For elemental war, and wintry Jove,
From Malea’s gusty cape his navy drove
To bright Lucina’s fane; the shelfy coast
Where loud Amnisus in the deep is lost.
His vessels moor’d (an incommodious port!)
The hero speeded to the Cnossian court:
Ardent the partner of his arms to find,
In leagues of long commutual friendship join’d.
Vain hope! ten suns had warm’d the western strand
Since my brave brother, with his Cretan band,
Had sail’d for Troy: but to the genial feast
My honour’d roof received the royal guest:
Beeves for his train the Cnossian peers assign,
A public treat, with jars of generous wine.
Twelve days while Boreas vex’d the aërial space,
My hospitable dome he deign’d to grace:
And when the north had ceased the stormy roar,
He wing’d his voyage to the Phrygian shore.”

Thus the fam’d hero, perfected in wiles,
With fair similitude of truth beguiles
The queen’s attentive ear: dissolved in woe,
From her bright eyes the tears unbounded flow,
As snows collected on the mountain freeze;
When milder regions breathe a vernal breeze,
The fleecy pile obeys the whispering gales,
Ends in a stream, and murmurs through the vales:
So, melting with the pleasing tale he told,
Down her fair cheek the copious torrent roll’d:
She to her present lord laments him lost,
And views that object which she wants the most,
Withering at heart to see the weeping fair,
His eyes look stern, and cast a gloomy stare;
Of horn the stiff relentless balls appear,
Or globes of iron fix’d in either sphere;
Firm wisdom interdicts the softening tear.
A speechless interval of grief ensues,
Till thus the queen the tender theme renews.

“Stranger! that e’er thy hospitable roof
Ulysses graced, confirm by faithful proof;
Delineate to my view my warlike lord,
His form, his habit, and his train record.”

“‘Tis hard (he cries,) to bring to sudden sight
Ideas that have wing’d their distant flight;
Rare on the mind those images are traced,
Whose footsteps twenty winters have defaced:
But what I can, receive.—In ample mode,
A robe of military purple flow’d
O’er all his frame: illustrious on his breast,
The double-clasping gold the king confess’d.
In the rich woof a hound, mosaic drawn,
Bore on full stretch, and seized a dappled fawn;
Deep in the neck his fangs indent their hold;
They pant and struggle in the moving gold.
Fine as a filmy web beneath it shone
A vest, that dazzled like a cloudless sun:
The female train who round him throng’d to gaze,
In silent wonder sigh’d unwilling praise.
A sabre, when the warrior press’d to part,
I gave, enamell’d with Vulcanian art:
A mantle purple-tinged, and radiant vest,
Dimension’d equal to his size, express’d
Affection grateful to my honour’d guest.
A favourite herald in his train I knew,
His visage solemn, sad of sable hue:
Short woolly curls o’erfleeced his bending head,
O’er which a promontory shoulder spread;
Eurybates; in whose large soul alone
Ulysses view’d an image of his own.”

His speech the tempest of her grief restored;
In all he told she recognized her lord:
But when the storm was spent in plenteous showers,
A pause inspiriting her languish’d powers,
“O thou, (she cried,) whom first inclement Fate
Made welcome to my hospitable gate;
With all thy wants the name of poor shall end:
Henceforth live honour’d, my domestic friend!
The vest much envied on your native coast,
And regal robe with figured gold emboss’d,
In happier hours my artful hand employ’d,
When my loved lord this blissful bower enjoy’d:
The fall of Troy erroneous and forlorn
Doom’d to survive, and never to return!”

Then he, with pity touch’d: “O royal dame!
Your ever-anxious mind, and beauteous frame,
From the devouring rage of grief reclaim.
I not the fondness of your soul reprove
For such a lord! who crown’d your virgin love
With the dear blessing of a fair increase;
Himself adorn’d with more than mortal grace:
Yet while I speak the mighty woe suspend;
Truth forms my tale; to pleasing truth attend.
The royal object of your dearest care
Breathes in no distant clime the vital air:
In rich Thesprotia, and the nearer bound
Of Thessaly, his name I heard renown’d:
Without retinue, to that friendly shore
Welcomed with gifts of price, a sumless store!
His sacrilegious train, who dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day,
Were doom’d by Jove, and Phœbus’ just decree,
To perish in the rough Trinacrian sea.
To better fate the blameless chief ordain’d,
A floating fragment of the wreck regain’d,
And rode the storm; till, by the billows toss’d,
He landed on the fair Phæacian coast.
That race who emulate the life of gods,
Receive him joyous to their bless’d abodes;
Large gifts confer, a ready sail command,
To speed his voyage to the Grecian strand.
But your wise lord (in whose capacious soul
High schemes of power in just succession roll)
His Ithaca refused from favouring Fate,
Till copious wealth might guard his regal state.
Phedon the fact affirm’d, whose sovereign sway
Thesprotian tribes, a duteous race, obey;
And bade the gods this added truth attest
(While pure libations crown’d the genial feast),
That anchor’d in his port the vessels stand,
To waft the hero to his natal land.
I for Dulichium urge the watery way,
But first the Ulyssean wealth survey:
So rich the value of a store so vast
Demands the pomp of centuries to waste!
The darling object of your royal love
Was journey’d thence to Dodonean Jove;
By the sure precept of the sylvan shrine,
To form the conduct of his great design;
Irresolute of soul, his state to shroud
In dark disguise, or come, a king avow’d!
Thus lives your lord; nor longer doom’d to roam;
Soon will he grace this dear paternal dome.
By Jove, the source of good, supreme in power!
By the bless’d genius of this friendly bower!
I ratify my speech, before the sun
His annual longitude of heaven shall run;
When the pale empress of yon starry train
In the next month renews her faded wane,
Ulysses will assert his rightful reign.”

“What thanks! what boon! (replied the queen), are due,
When time shall prove the storied blessing true!
My lord’s return should fate no more retard,
Envy shall sicken at thy vast reward.
But my prophetic fears, alas! presage
The wounds of Destiny’s relentless rage.
I long must weep, nor will Ulysses come,
With royal gifts to send you honour’d home!—
Your other task, ye menial train forbear:
Now wash the stranger, and the bed prepare:
With splendid palls the downy fleece adorn:
Uprising early with the purple morn.
His sinews, shrunk with age, and stiff with toil,
In the warm bath foment with fragrant oil.
Then with Telemachus the social feast
Partaking free, my soul invited guest;
Whoe’er neglects to pay distinction due,
The breach of hospitable right may rue.
The vulgar of my sex I most exceed
In real fame, when most humane my deed;
And vainly to the praise of queen aspire,
If, stranger! I permit that mean attire
Beneath the feastful bower. A narrow space
Confines the circle of our destin’d race;
’Tis ours with good the scanty round to grace.
Those who to cruel wrong their state abuse,
Dreaded in life the mutter’d curse pursues;
By death disrobed of all their savage powers,
Then, licensed rage her hateful prey devours.
But he whose inborn worth his acts commend,
Of gentle soul, to human race a friend;
The wretched he relieves diffuse his fame,
And distant tongues extol the patron-name.”

“Princess? (he cried) in vain your bounties flow
On me, confirm’d and obstinate in woe.
When my loved Crete received my final view,
And from my weeping eyes her cliffs withdrew;
These tatter’d weeds (my decent robes resign’d)
I chose, the livery of a woful mind!
Nor will my heart-corroding care abate
With splendid palls, and canopies of state:
Low-couch’d on earth, the gift of sleep I scorn,
And catch the glances of the waking morn.
The delicacy of your courtly train
To wash a wretched wanderer would disdain;
But if, in tract of long experience tried,
And sad similitude of woes allied,
Some wretch reluctant views aërial light,
To her mean hand assign the friendly rite.”

Pleased with his wise reply, the queen rejoin’d:
“Such gentle manners, and so sage a mind,
In all who graced this hospitable bower
I ne’er discerned, before this social hour.
Such servant as your humble choice requires,
To light received the lord of my desires,
New from the birth; and with a mother’s hand
His tender bloom to manly growth sustain’d:
Of matchless prudence, and a duteous mind;
Though now to life’s extremest verge declined,
Of strength superior to the toil design’d—
Rise, Euryclea! with officious care
For the poor friend the cleansing bath prepare:
This debt his correspondent fortunes claim,
Too like Ulysses, and perhaps the same!
Thus old with woes my fancy paints him now!
For age untimely marks the careful brow.”

Instant, obsequious to the mild command,
Sad Euryclea rose: with trembling hand
She veils the torrent of her tearful eyes;
And thus impassion’d to herself replies:

“Son of my love, and monarch of my cares,
What pangs for thee this wretched bosom bears!
Are thus by Jove who constant beg his aid
With pious deed, and pure devotion, paid?
He never dared defraud the sacred fane
Of perfect hecatombs in order slain:
There oft implored his tutelary power,
Long to protract the sad sepulchral hour;
That, form’d for empire with paternal care,
His realm might recognize an equal heir.
O destined head! The pious vows are lost;
His God forgets him on a foreign coast!—
Perhaps, like thee, poor guest! in wanton pride
The rich insult him, and the young deride!
Conscious of worth reviled, thy generous mind
The friendly rite of purity declined;
My will concurring with my queen’s command,
Accept the bath from this obsequious hand.
A strong emotion shakes my anguish’d breast:
In thy whole form Ulysses seems express’d;
Of all the wretched harboured on our coast,
None imaged e’er like thee my master lost.”

Thus half-discover’d through the dark disguise,
With cool composure feign’d, the chief replies:
“You join your suffrage to the public vote;
The same you think have all beholders thought.”

He said: replenish’d from the purest springs,
The laver straight with busy care she brings:
In the deep vase, that shone like burnish’d gold,
The boiling fluid temperates the cold.
Meantime revolving in his thoughtful mind
The scar, with which his manly knee was sign’d;
His face averting from the crackling blaze,
His shoulders intercept the unfriendly rays:
Thus cautious in the obscure he hoped to fly
The curious search of Euryclea’s eye.
Cautious in vain! nor ceased the dame to find
This scar with which his manly knee was sign’d.

This on Parnassus (combating the boar)
With glancing rage the tusky savage tore.
Attended by his brave maternal race,
His grandsire sent him to the sylvan chase,
Autolycus the bold (a mighty name
For spotless faith and deeds of martial fame:
Hermes, his patron god, those gifts bestow’d,
Whose shrine with weanling lambs he wont to load).
His course to Ithaca this hero sped,
When the first product of Laertes’ bed
Was now disclosed to birth: the banquet ends,
When Euryclea from the queen descends,
And to his fond embrace the babe commends:
“Receive (she cries) your royal daughter’s son;
And name the blessing that your prayers have won.”
Then thus the hoary chief: “My victor arms
Have awed the realms around with dire alarms:
A sure memorial of my dreaded fame
The boy shall bear; Ulysses be his name!
And when with filial love the youth shall come
To view his mother’s soil, my Delphic dome
With gifts of price shall send him joyous home.”
Lured with the promised boon, when youthful prime
Ended in man, his mother’s natal clime
Ulysses sought; with fond affection dear
Amphitea’s arms received the royal heir:
Her ancient lord an equal joy possess’d;
Instant he bade prepare the genial feast:
A steer to form the sumptuous banquet bled,
Whose stately growth five flowery summers fed:
His sons divide, and roast with artful care
The limbs; then all the tasteful viands share.
Nor ceased discourse (the banquet of the soul),
Till Phœbus wheeling to the western goal
Resign’d the skies, and night involved the pole.
Their drooping eyes the slumberous shade oppress’d,
Sated they rose, and all retired to rest.

Soon as the morn, new-robed in purple light,
Pierced with her golden shafts the rear of night,
Ulysses, and his brave maternal race,
The young Autolyci, essay the chase.
Parnassus, thick perplex’d with horrid shades,
With deep-mouth’d hounds the hunter-troop invades;
What time the sun, from ocean’s peaceful stream,
Darts o’er the lawn his horizontal beam.
The pack impatient snuff the tainted gale;
The thorny wilds the woodmen fierce assail:
And, foremost of the train, his cornel spear
Ulysses waved, to rouse the savage war.
Deep in the rough recesses of the wood,
A lofty copse, the growth of ages, stood;
Nor winter’s boreal blast, nor thunderous shower,
Nor solar ray, could pierce the shady bower.
With wither’d foliage strew’d, a heapy store!
The warm pavilion of a dreadful boar.
Roused by the hounds’ and hunters’ mingling cries,
The savage from his leafy shelter flies;
With fiery glare his sanguine eye-balls shine,
And bristles high impale his horrid chine.
Young Ithacus advanced, defies the foe,
Poising his lifted lance in act to throw;
The savage renders vain the wound decreed,
And springs impetuous with opponent speed!
His tusks oblique he aim’d, the knee to gore;
Aslope they glanced, the sinewy fibres tore,
And bared the bone; Ulysses undismay’d,
Soon with redoubled force the wound repaid;
To the right shoulder-joint the spear applied,
His further flank with streaming purple dyed:
On earth he rushed with agonizing pain;
With joy and vast surprise, the applauding train
View’d his enormous bulk extended on the plain.
With bandage firm Ulysses’ knee they bound;
Then, chanting mystic lays, the closing wound
Of sacred melody confess’d the force;
The tides of life regain’d their azure course.
Then back they led the youth with loud acclaim;
Autolycus, enamoured with his fame,
Confirm’d the cure; and from the Delphic dome
With added gifts return’d him glorious home.
He safe at Ithaca with joy received,
Relates the chase, and early praise achieved.

Deep o’er his knee inseam’d remain’d the scar;
Which noted token of the woodland war
When Euryclea found, the ablution ceased:
Down dropp’d the leg, from her slack hand released;
The mingled fluids from the base redound;
The vase reclining floats the floor around!
Smiles dew’d with tears the pleasing strife express’d
Of grief and joy, alternate in her breast.
Her fluttering words in melting murmurs died;
At length abrupt—“My son!—my king!”—she cried.
His neck with fond embrace infolding fast,
Full on the queen her raptured eye she cast
Ardent to speak the monarch safe restored:
But, studious to conceal her royal lord,
Minerva fix’d her mind on views remote,
And from the present bliss abstracts her thought.
His hand to Euryclea’s mouth applied,
“Art thou foredoom’d my pest? (the hero cried:)
Thy milky founts my infant lips have drain’d;
And have the Fates thy babbling age ordain’d
To violate the life thy youth sustain’d?
An exile have I told, with weeping eyes,
Full twenty annual suns in distant skies;
At length return’d, some god inspires thy breast
To know thy king, and here I stand confess’d.
This heaven-discover’d truth to thee consign’d,
Reserve the treasure of thy inmost mind:
Else, if the gods my vengeful arm sustain,
And prostrate to my sword the suitor-train;
With their lewd mates, thy undistinguish’d age
Shall bleed a victim to vindictive rage.”

Then thus rejoin’d the dame, devoid of fear:
“What words, my son, have passed thy lips severe?
Deep in my soul the trust shall lodge secured;
With ribs of steel, and marble heart, immured.
When Heaven, auspicious to thy right avow’d,
Shall prostrate to thy sword the suitor-crowd,
The deeds I’ll blazon of the menial fair;
The lewd to death devote, the virtuous spare.”

“Thy aid avails me not (the chief replied);
My own experience shall their doom decide:
A witness-judge precludes a long appeal:
Suffice it then thy monarch to conceal.”

He said: obsequious, with redoubled pace,
She to the fount conveys the exhausted vase:
The bath renew’d, she ends the pleasing toil
With plenteous unction of ambrosial oil.
Adjusting to his limbs the tatter’d vest,
His former seat received the stranger guest;
Whom thus with pensive air the queen addressed:

“Though night, dissolving grief in grateful ease,
Your drooping eyes with soft impression seize;
Awhile, reluctant to her pleasing force,
Suspend the restful hour with sweet discourse.
The day (ne’er brighten’d with a beam of joy!)
My menials, and domestic cares employ;
And, unattended by sincere repose,
The night assists my ever-wakeful woes;
When nature’s hush’d beneath her brooding shade,
My echoing griefs the starry vault invade.
As when the months are clad in flowery green,
Sad Philomel, in bowery shades unseen,
To vernal airs attunes her varied strains;
And Itylus sounds warbling o’er the plains;
Young Itylus, his parents’ darling joy!
Whom chance misled the mother to destroy;
Now doom’d a wakeful bird to wail the beauteous boy.
So in nocturnal solitude forlorn,
A sad variety of woes I mourn!
My mind, reflective, in a thorny maze
Devious from care to care incessant strays.
Now, wavering doubt succeeds to long despair;
Shall I my virgin nuptial vow revere;
And, joining to my son’s my menial train,
Partake his counsels, and assist his reign?
Or, since, mature in manhood, he deplores
His dome dishonour’d, and exhausted stores;
Shall I, reluctant! to his will accord;
And from the peers select the noblest lord;
So by my choice avow’d, at length decide
These wasteful love-debates, a mourning bride!
A visionary thought I’ll now relate;
Illustrate, if you know, the shadow’d fate:

“A team of twenty geese (a snow-white train!)
Fed near the limpid lake with golden grain,
Amuse my pensive hours. The bird of Jove
Fierce from his mountain-eyrie downward drove;
Each favourite fowl he pounced with deathful sway,
And back triumphant wing’d his airy way.
My pitying eyes effused a plenteous stream,
To view their death thus imaged in a dream;
With tender sympathy to soothe my soul,
A troop of matrons, fancy-form’d, condole.
But whilst with grief and rage my bosom burn’d,
Sudden the tyrant of the skies returned;
Perch’d on the battlements he thus began
(In form an eagle, but in voice a man):
`O queen! no vulgar vision of the sky
I come, prophetic of approaching joy;
View in this plumy form thy victor-lord;
The geese (a glutton race) by thee deplored,
Portend the suitors fated to my sword.’
This said, the pleasing feather’d omen ceased.
When from the downy bands of sleep released,
Fast by the limpid lake my swan-like train
I found, insatiate of the golden grain.”

“The vision self-explain’d (the chief replies)
Sincere reveals the sanction of the skies;
Ulysses speaks his own return decreed;
And by his sword the suitors sure to bleed.”

“Hard is the task, and rare,” (the queen rejoin’d,)
Impending destinies in dreams to find;
Immured within the silent bower of sleep,
Two portals firm the various phantoms keep;
Of ivory one; whence flit, to mock the brain,
Of winged lies a light fantastic train;
The gate opposed pellucid valves adorn,
And columns fair incased with polish’d horn;
Where images of truth for passage wait,
With visions manifest of future fate.
Not to this troop, I fear, that phantom soar’d,
Which spoke Ulysses to this realm restored;
Delusive semblance!-but my remnant life
Heaven shall determine in a gameful strife;
With that famed bow Ulysses taught to bend,
For me the rival archers shall contend.
As on the listed field he used to place
Six beams, opposed to six in equal space;
Elanced afar by his unerring art,
Sure through six circlets flew the whizzing dart.
So, when the sun restores the purple day,
Their strength and skill the suitors shall assay;
To him the spousal honour is decreed,
Who through the rings directs the feather’d reed.
Torn from these walls (where long the kinder powers
With joy and pomp have wing’d my youthful hours!)
On this poor breast no dawn of bliss shall beam;
The pleasure past supplies a copious theme
For many a dreary thought, and many a doleful dream!”

“Propose the sportive lot (the chief replies),
Nor dread to name yourself the bowyer’s prize;
Ulysses will surprise the unfinish’d game,
Avow’d, and falsify the suitors’ claim.”

To whom with grace serene the queen rejoin’d:
“In all thy speech what pleasing force I find!
O’er my suspended woe thy words prevail;
I part reluctant from the pleasing tale,
But Heaven, that knows what all terrestrials need,
Repose to night, and toil to day decreed;
Grateful vicissitudes! yet me withdrawn,
Wakeful to weep and watch the tardy dawn
Establish’d use enjoins; to rest and joy
Estranged, since dear Ulysses sail’d to Troy!
Meantime instructed is the menial tribe
Your couch to fashion as yourself prescribe.”

Thus affable, her bower the queen ascends;
The sovereign step a beauteous train attends;
There imaged to her soul Ulysses rose;
Down her pale cheek new-streaming sorrow flows;
Till soft oblivious shade Minerva spread,
And o’er her eyes ambrosial slumber shed.




BOOK XX.


ARGUMENT.


While Ulysses lies in the vestibule of the palace, he is witness to the
disorders of the women. Minerva comforts him, and casts him asleep. At
his waking he desires a favourable sign from Jupiter, which is granted.
The feast of Apollo is celebrated by the people, and the suitors
banquet in the palace. Telemachus exerts his authority amongst them;
notwithstanding which, Ulysses is insulted by Caesippus, and the rest
continue in their excesses. Strange prodigies are seen by Theoclymenus,
the augur, who explains them to the destruction of the wooers.


An ample hide devine Ulysses spread.
And form’d of fleecy skins his humble bed
(The remnants of the spoil the suitor-crowd
In festival devour’d, and victims vow’d).
Then o’er the chief, Eurynome the chaste
With duteous care a downy carpet cast:
With dire revenge his thoughtful bosom glows,
And, ruminating wrath, he scorns repose.

As thus pavilion’d in the porch he lay,
Scenes of lewd loves his wakeful eyes survey,
Whilst to nocturnal joys impure repair,
With wanton glee, the prostituted fair.
His heart with rage this new dishonour stung,
Wavering his thoughts in dubious balance hung:
Or instant should he quench the guilty flame
With their own blood, and intercept the shame:
Or to their lust indulge a last embrace,
And let the peers consummate the disgrace
Round his swoln heart the murmurous fury rolls,
As o’er her young the mother-mastiff growls,
And bays the stranger groom: so wrath compress’d,
Recoiling, mutter’d thunder in his breast.
“Poor suffering heart! (he cried,) support the pain
Of wounded honour, and thy rage restrain.
Not fiercer woes thy fortitude could foil,
When the brave partners of thy ten years’ toil
Dire Polypheme devour’d; I then was freed
By patient prudence from the death decreed.”

Thus anchor’d safe on reason’s peaceful coast,
Tempests of wrath his soul no longer toss’d;
Restless his body rolls, to rage resign’d
As one who long with pale-eyed famine pined,
The savoury cates on glowing embers cast
Incessant turns, impatient for repast
Ulysses so, from side to side-devolved,
In self-debate the suitor’s doom resolved
When in the form of mortal nymph array’d,
From heaven descends the Jove-born martial maid;
And hovering o’er his head in view confess’d,
The goddess thus her favourite care address’d:

“O thou, of mortals most inured to woes!
Why roll those eyes unfriended of repose?
Beneath thy palace-roof forget thy care;
Bless’d in thy queen! bless’d in thy blooming heir!
Whom, to the gods when suppliant fathers bow
They name the standard of their dearest vow.”

“Just is thy kind reproach (the chief rejoin’d),
Deeds full of fate distract my various mind,
In contemplation wrapp’d. This hostile crew
What single arm hath prowess to subdue?
Or if, by Jove’s and thy auxiliar aid,
They’re doom’d to bleed; O say, celestial maid!
Where shall Ulysses shun, or how sustain
Nations embattled to revenge the slain?”

“Oh impotence of faith! (Minerva cries,)
If man on frail unknowing man relies,
Doubt you the gods? Lo, Pallas self descends,
Inspires thy counsels, and thy toils attends.
In me affianced, fortify thy breast,
Though myriads leagued thy rightful claim contest
My sure divinity shall bear the shield,
And edge thy sword to reap the glorious field.
Now, pay the debt to craving nature due,
Her faded powers with balmy rest renew.”
She ceased, ambrosial slumbers seal his eyes;
Her care dissolves in visionary joys
The goddess, pleased, regains her natal skies.

Not so the queen; the downy bands of sleep
By grief relax’d she waked again to weep:
A gloomy pause ensued of dumb despair;
Then thus her fate invoked, with fervent prayer

“Diana! speed thy deathful ebon dart,
And cure the pangs of this convulsive heart.
Snatch me, ye whirlwinds! far from human race,
Toss’d through the void illimitable space
Or if dismounted from the rapid cloud,
Me with his whelming wave let Ocean shroud!
So, Pandarus, thy hopes, three orphan fair,
Were doom’d to wander through the devious air;
Thyself untimely, and thy consort died,
But four celestials both your cares supplied.
Venus in tender delicacy rears
With honey, milk, and wine their infant years;
Imperial Juno to their youth assigned
A form majestic, and sagacious mind;
With shapely growth Diana graced their bloom;
And Pallas taught the texture of the loom.
But whilst, to learn their lots in nuptial love,
Bright Cytherea sought the bower of Jove
(The God supreme, to whose eternal eye
The registers of fate expanded lie);
Wing’d Harpies snatch the unguarded charge away,
And to the Furies bore a grateful prey.
Be such my lot! Or thou, Diana, speed
Thy shaft, and send me joyful to the dead;
To seek my lord among the warrior train,
Ere second vows my bridal faith profane.
When woes the waking sense alone assail,
Whilst Night extends her soft oblivious veil,
Of other wretches’ care the torture ends;
No truce the warfare of my heart suspends!
The night renews the day distracting theme,
And airy terrors sable every dream.
The last alone a kind illusion wrought,
And to my bed my loved Ulysses brought,
In manly bloom, and each majestic grace,
As when for Troy he left my fond embrace;
Such raptures in my beating bosom rise,
I deem it sure a vision of the skies.”

Thus, whilst Aurora mounts her purple throne,
In audible laments she breathes her moan;
The sounds assault Ulysses’ wakeful ear;
Misjudging of the cause, a sudden fear
Of his arrival known, the chief alarms;
He thinks the queen is rushing to his arms.
Upspringing from his couch, with active haste
The fleece and carpet in the dome he placed
(The hide, without, imbibed the morning air);
And thus the gods invoked with ardent prayer:

“Jove, and eternal thrones! with heaven to friend,
If the long series of my woes shall end;
Of human race now rising from repose,
Let one a blissful omen here disclose;
And, to confirm my faith, propitious Jove!
Vouchsafe the sanction of a sign above.”

Whilst lowly thus the chief adoring bows,
The pitying god his guardian aid avows.
Loud from a sapphire sky his thunder sounds;
With springing hope the hero’s heart rebounds.
Soon, with consummate joy to crown his prayer,
An omen’d voice invades his ravish’d ear.
Beneath a pile that close the dome adjoin’d,
Twelve female slaves the gift of Ceres grind;
Task’d for the royal board to bolt the bran
From the pure flour (the growth and strength of man)
Discharging to the day the labour due,
Now early to repose the rest withdrew;
One maid unequal to the task assign’d,
Still turn’d the toilsome mill with anxious mind;
And thus in bitterness of soul divined:

“Father of gods and men, whose thunders roll
O’er the cerulean vault, and shake the pole:
Whoe’er from Heaven has gain’d this rare ostent
(Of granted vows a certain signal sent),
In this blest moment of accepted prayer,
Piteous, regard a wretch consumed with care!
Instant, O Jove! confound the suitor-train,
For whom o’ertoil’d I grind the golden grain:
Far from this dome the lewd devourers cast,
And be this festival decreed their last!”

Big with their doom denounced in earth and sky,
Ulysses’ heart dilates with secret joy.
Meantime the menial train with unctious wood
Heap’d high the genial hearth, Vulcanian food:
When, early dress’d, advanced the royal heir;
With manly grasp he waved a martial spear;
A radiant sabre graced his purple zone,
And on his foot the golden sandal shone.
His steps impetuous to the portal press’d;
And Euryclea thus he there address’d:

“Say thou to whom my youth its nurture owes,
Was care for due refection and repose
Bestow’d the stranger-guest? Or waits he grieved,
His age not honour’d, nor his wants relieved?
Promiscuous grace on all the queen confers
(In woes bewilder’d, oft the wisest errs).
The wordy vagrant to the dole aspires,
And modest worth with noble scorn retires.”

She thus: “O cease that ever-honour’d name
To blemish now: it ill deserves your blame,
A bowl of generous wine sufficed the guest;
In vain the queen the night refection press’d;
Nor would he court repose in downy state,
Unbless’d, abandon’d to the rage of Fate!
A hide beneath the portico was spread,
And fleecy skins composed an humble bed;
A downy carpet cast with duteous care,
Secured him from the keen nocturnal air.”

His cornel javelin poised with regal port,
To the sage Greeks convened in Themis’ court,
Forth-issuing from the dome the prince repair’d;
Two dogs of chase, a lion-hearted guard,
Behind him sourly stalked. Without delay
The dame divides the labour of the day;
Thus urging to the toil the menial train;

“What marks of luxury the marble stain
Its wonted lustre let the floor regain;
The seats with purple clothe in order due;
And let the abstersive sponge the board renew;
Let some refresh the vase’s sullied mould;
Some bid the goblets boast their native gold;
Some to the spring, with each a jar, repair,
And copious waters pure for bathing bear;
Dispatch! for soon the suitors will essay
The lunar feast-rites to the god of day.”

She said: with duteous haste a bevy fair
Of twenty virgins to the spring repair;
With varied toils the rest adorn the dome.
Magnificent, and blithe, the suitors come.
Some wield the sounding axe; the dodder’d oaks
Divide, obedient to the forceful strokes.
Soon from the fount, with each a brimming urn
(Eumaeus in their train), the maids return.
Three porkers for the feast, all brawny-chined,
He brought; the choicest of the tusky-kind;
In lodgments first secure his care he viewed,
Then to the king this friendly speech renew’d:
“Now say sincere, my guest! the suitor-train
Still treat thy worth with lordly dull disdain;
Or speaks their deed a bounteous mind humane?”

“Some pitying god (Ulysses sad replied)
With vollied vengeance blast their towering pride!
No conscious blush, no sense of right, restrains
The tides of lust that swell the boiling veins;
From vice to vice their appetites are toss’d,
All cheaply sated at another’s cost!”

While thus the chief his woes indignant told,
Melanthius, master of the bearded fold,
The goodliest goats of all the royal herd
Spontaneous to the suitors’ feast preferr’d;
Two grooms assistant bore the victims bound;
With quavering cries the vaulted roofs resound;
And to the chief austere aloud began
The wretch unfriendly to the race of man:

“Here vagrant, still? offensive to my lords!
Blows have more energy than airy words;
These arguments I’ll use: nor conscious shame,
Nor threats, thy bold intrusion will reclaim.
On this high feast the meanest vulgar boast
A plenteous board! Hence! seek another host!”

Rejoinder to the churl the king disdain’d,
But shook his head, and rising wrath restrain’d.

From Cephalenia ’cross the surgy main
Philaetius late arrived, a faithful swain.
A steer ungrateful to the bull’s embrace.
And goats he brought, the pride of all their race;
Imported in a shallop not his own;
The dome re-echoed to the mingl’d moan.
Straight to the guardian of the bristly kind
He thus began, benevolent of mind:

“What guest is he, of such majestic air?
His lineage and paternal clime declare:
Dim through the eclipse of fate, the rays divine
Of sovereign state with faded splendour shine.
If monarchs by the gods are plunged in woe,
To what abyss are we foredoom’d to go!”
Then affable he thus the chief address’d,
Whilst with pathetic warmth his hand he press’d:

“Stranger, may fate a milder aspect show,
And spin thy future with a whiter clue!
O Jove! for ever deaf to human cries;
The tyrant, not the father of the skies!
Unpiteous of the race thy will began!
The fool of fate, thy manufacture, man,
With penury, contempt, repulse, and care,
The galling load of life is doom’d to bear.
Ulysses from his state a wanderer still,
Upbraids thy power, thy wisdom, or thy will!
O monarch ever dear!-O man of woe!
Fresh flow my tears, and shall for ever flow!
Like thee, poor stranger guest, denied his home,
Like thee: in rags obscene decreed to roam!
Or, haply perish’d on some distant coast,
In stygian gloom he glides, a pensive ghost!
Oh, grateful for the good his bounty gave,
I’ll grieve, till sorrow sink me to the grave!
His kind protecting hand my youth preferr’d,
The regent of his Cephalenian herd;
With vast increase beneath my care it spreads:
A stately breed! and blackens far the meads.
Constrain’d, the choicest beeves I thence import,
To cram these cormorants that crowd his court:
Who in partition seek his realm to share;
Nor human right nor wrath divine revere,
Since here resolved oppressive these reside,
Contending doubts my anxious heart divide:
Now to some foreign clime inclined to fly,
And with the royal herd protection buy;
Then, happier thoughts return the nodding scale,
Light mounts despair, alternate hopes prevail:
In opening prospects of ideal joy,
My king returns; the proud usurpers die.”

To whom the chief: “In thy capacious mind
Since daring zeal with cool debate is join’d,
Attend a deed already ripe in fate:
Attest, O Jove! the truth I now relate!
This sacred truth attest, each genial power,
Who bless the board, and guard this friendly bower!
Before thou quit the dome (nor long delay)
Thy wish produced in act, with pleased survey,
Thy wondering eyes shall view: his rightful reign
By arms avow’d Ulysses shall regain,
And to the shades devote the suitor-train.”

“O Jove supreme! (the raptured swain replies,)
With deeds consummate soon the promised joys!
These aged nerves, with new-born vigour strung,
In that blest cause should emulate the young.”
Assents Eumaeus to the prayer address’d;
And equal ardours fire his loyal breast.

Meantime the suitors urge the prince’s fate,
And deathful arts employ the dire debate:
When in his airy tour, the bird of Jove
Truss’d with his sinewy pounce a trembling dove;
Sinister to their hope! This omen eyed
Amphinomus, who thus presaging cried:

“The gods from force and fraud the prince defend;
O peers! the sanguinary scheme suspend:
Your future thought let sable fate employ;
And give the present hour to genial joy.”

From council straight the assenting peerage ceased,
And in the dome prepared the genial feast.
Disrobed, their vests apart in order lay,
Then all with speed succinct the victims slay:
With sheep and shaggy goats the porkers bled,
And the proud steer was on the marble spread.
With fire prepared, they deal the morsels round,
Wine, rosy-bright, the brimming goblets crown’d,
By sage Eumaeus borne; the purple tide
Melanthius from an ample jar supplied:
High canisters of bread Philaetius placed;
And eager all devour the rich repast.
Disposed apart, Ulysses shares the treat;
A trivet table, and ignobler seat,
The prince appoints; but to his sire assigns
The tasteful inwards, and nectareous wines.
“Partake, my guest (he cried), without control
The social feast, and drain the cheering bowl:
Dread not the railer’s laugh, nor ruffian’s rage;
No vulgar roof protects thy honour’d age;
This dome a refuge to thy wrongs shall be,
From my great sire too soon devolved to me!
Your violence and scorn, ye suitors, cease,
Lest arms avenge the violated peace.”

Awed by the prince, so haughty, brave, and young,
Rage gnaw’d the lip, amazement chain’d the tongue.
“Be patient, peers! (at length Antinous cries,)
The threats of vain imperious youth despise:
Would Jove permit the meditated blow,
That stream of eloquence should cease to flow.”

Without reply vouchsafed, Antinous ceased:
Meanwhile the pomp of festival increased:
By heralds rank’d; in marshall’d order move
The city tribes, to pleased Apollo’s grove:
Beneath the verdure of which awful shade,
The lunar hecatomb they grateful laid;
Partook the sacred feast, and ritual honours paid.
But the rich banquet, in the dome prepared
(An humble sideboard set) Ulysses shared.
Observant of the prince’s high behest,
His menial train attend the stranger-guest;
Whom Pallas with unpardoning fury fired,
By lordly pride and keen reproach inspired.
A Samian peer, more studious than the rest
Of vice, who teem’d with many a dead-born jest;
And urged, for title to a consort queen,
Unnumber’d acres arable and green
(Ctesippus named); this lord Ulysses eyed,
And thus burst out the imposthumate with pride:

“The sentence I propose, ye peers, attend:
Since due regard must wait the prince’s friend,
Let each a token of esteem bestow:
This gift acquits the dear respect I owe;
With which he nobly may discharge his seat,
And pay the menials for a master’s treat.”

He said: and of the steer before him placed,
That sinewy fragment at Ulysses cast,
Where to the pastern-bone, by nerves combined,
The well-horn’d foot indissolubly join’d;
Which whizzing high, the wall unseemly sign’d.
The chief indignant grins a ghastly smile;
Revenge and scorn within his bosom boil:
When thus the prince with pious rage inflamed:
“Had not the inglorious wound thy malice aim’d
Fall’n guiltless of the mark, my certain spear
Had made thee buy the brutal triumph dear:
Nor should thy sire a queen his daughter boast;
The suitor, now, had vanish’d in a ghost:
No more, ye lewd compeers, with lawless power
Invade my dome, my herds and flocks devour:
For genuine worth, of age mature to know,
My grape shall redden, and my harvest grow
Or, if each other’s wrongs ye still support,
With rapes and riot to profane my court;
What single arm with numbers can contend?
On me let all your lifted swords descend,
And with my life such vile dishonours end.”

A long cessation of discourse ensued,
By gentler Agelaus thus renew’d:

“A just reproof, ye peers! your rage restrain
From the protected guest, and menial train:
And, prince! to stop the source of future ill,
Assent yourself, and gain the royal will.
Whilst hope prevail’d to see your sire restored,
Of right the queen refused a second lord:
But who so vain of faith, so blind to fate,
To think he still survives to claim the state?
Now press the sovereign dame with warm desire
To wed, as wealth or worth her choice inspire:
The lord selected to the nuptial joys
Far hence will lead the long-contested prize:
Whilst in paternal pomp with plenty bless’d,
You reign, of this imperial dome possess’d.”

Sage and serene Telemachus replies:
“By him at whose behest the thunder flies,
And by the name on earth I most revere,
By great Ulysses and his woes I swear!
(Who never must review his dear domain;
Enroll’d, perhaps, in Pluto’s dreary train),
Whene’er her choice the royal dame avows,
My bridal gifts shall load the future spouse:
But from this dome my parent queen to chase!
From me, ye gods! avert such dire disgrace.”

But Pallas clouds with intellectual gloom
The suitors’ souls, insensate of their doom!
A mirthful frenzy seized the fated crowd;
The roofs resound with causeless laughter loud;
Floating in gore, portentous to survey!
In each discolour’d vase the viands lay;
Then down each cheek the tears spontaneous flow
And sudden sighs precede approaching woe.
In vision wrapp’d, the Hyperesian seer
Uprose, and thus divined the vengeance near:

“O race to death devote! with Stygian shade
Each destin’d peer impending fates invade;
With tears your wan distorted cheeks are drown’d;
With sanguine drops the walls are rubied round:
Thick swarms the spacious hall with howling ghosts,
To people Orcus, and the burning coasts!
Nor gives the sun his golden orb to roll,
But universal night usurps the pole!”

Yet warn’d in vain, with laughter loud elate
The peers reproach the sure divine of Fate;
And thus Eurymachus: “The dotard’s mind
To every sense is lost, to reason blind;
Swift from the dome conduct the slave away;
Let him in open air behold the day.”

“Tax not (the heaven-illumined seer rejoin’d)
Of rage, or folly, my prophetic mind,
No clouds of error dim the ethereal rays,
Her equal power each faithful sense obeys.
Unguided hence my trembling steps I bend,
Far hence, before yon hovering deaths descend;
Lest the ripe harvest of revenge begun,
I share the doom ye suitors cannot shun.”

This said, to sage Piraeus sped the seer,
His honour’d host, a welcome inmate there.
O’er the protracted feast the suitors sit,
And aim to wound the prince with pointless wit:
Cries one, with scornful leer and mimic voice,
“Thy charity we praise, but not thy choice;
Why such profusion of indulgence shown
To this poor, timorous, toil-detesting drone?
That others feeds on planetary schemes,
And pays his host with hideous noon-day dreams.
But, prince! for once at least believe a friend;
To some Sicilian mart these courtiers send,
Where, if they yield their freight across the main,
Dear sell the slaves! demand no greater gain.”

Thus jovial they; but nought the prince replies;
Full on his sire he roll’d his ardent eyes:
Impatient straight to flesh his virgin-sword;
From the wise chief he waits the deathful word.
Nigh in her bright alcove, the pensive queen
To see the circle sate, of all unseen.
Sated at length they rise, and bid prepare
An eve-repast, with equal cost and care:
But vengeful Pallas, with preventing speed,
A feast proportion’d to their crimes decreed;
A feast of death, the feasters doom’d to bleed!




BOOK XXI.


ARGUMENT.
THE BENDING OF ULYSSES’ BOW.


Penelope, to put an end to the solicitation of the suitors, proposes to
marry the person who shall first bend the bow of Ulysses, and shoot
through the ringlets. After their attempts have proved ineffectual,
Ulysses, taking Eumaeus and Philaetius apart, discovers himself to
them; then returning, desires leave to try his strength at the bow,
which, though refused with indignation by the suitors, Penelope and
Telemachus cause it to be delivered to his hands. He bends it
immediately, and shoots through all the rings. Jupiter at the same
instant thunders from heaven; Ulysses accepts the omen, and gives a
sign to Telemachus, who stands ready armed at his side.


And Pallas now, to raise the rivals’ fires,
With her own art Penelope inspires
Who now can bend Ulysses’ bow, and wing
The well-aim’d arrow through the distant ring,
Shall end the strife, and win the imperial dame:
But discord and black death await the game!

The prudent queen the lofty stair ascends:
At distance due a virgin-train attends;
A brazen key she held, the handle turn’d,
With steel and polish’d elephant adorn’d:
Swift to the inmost room she bent her way,
Where, safe reposed, the royal treasures lay:
There shone high heap’d the labour’d brass and ore,
And there the bow which great Ulysses bore;
And there the quiver, where now guiltless slept
Those winged deaths that many a matron wept.

This gift, long since when Sparta’s shore he trod,
On young Ulysses Iphitus bestowed:
Beneath Orsilochus’ roof they met;
One loss was private, one a public debt;
Messena’s state from Ithaca detains
Three hundred sheep, and all the shepherd swains;
And to the youthful prince to urge the laws,
The king and elders trust their common cause.
But Iphitus, employed on other cares,
Search’d the wide country for his wandering mares,
And mules, the strongest of the labouring kind;
Hapless to search; more hapless still to find!
For journeying on to Hercules, at length
That lawless wretch, that man of brutal strength,
Deaf to Heaven’s voice, the social rites transgress’d;
And for the beauteous mares destroy’d his guest.
He gave the bow; and on Ulysses’ part
Received a pointed sword, and missile dart:
Of luckless friendship on a foreign shore
Their first, last pledges! for they met no more.
The bow, bequeath’d by this unhappy hand,
Ulysses bore not from his native land;
Nor in the front of battle taught to bend,
But kept in dear memorial of his friend.

Now gently winding up the fair ascent,
By many an easy step the matron went;
Then o’er the pavement glides with grace divine
(With polish’d oak the level pavements shine);
The folding gates a dazzling light display’d,
With pomp of various architrave o’erlaid.
The bolt, obedient to the silken string,
Forsakes the staple as she pulls the ring;
The wards respondent to the key turn round;
The bars fall back; the flying valves resound;
Loud as a bull makes hill and valley ring,
So roar’d the lock when it released the spring.
She moves majestic through the wealthy room,
Where treasured garments cast a rich perfume;
There from the column where aloft it hung,
Reach’d in its splendid case, the bow unstrung;
Across her knees she laid the well-known bow,
And pensive sate, and tears began to flow.
To full satiety of grief she mourns,
Then silent to the joyous hall returns,
To the proud suitors bears in pensive state
The unbended bow, and arrows winged with fate.

Behind, her train the polish’d coffer brings,
Which held the alternate brass and silver rings.
Full in the portal the chaste queen appears,
And with her veil conceals the coming tears:
On either side awaits a virgin fair;
While thus the matron, with majestic air:

“Say you, when these forbidden walls inclose,
For whom my victims bleed, my vintage flows:
If these neglected, faded charms can move?
Or is it but a vain pretence, you love?
If I the prize, if me you seek to wife,
Hear the conditions, and commence the strife.
Who first Ulysses’ wondrous bow shall bend,
And through twelve ringlets the fleet arrow send;
Him will I follow, and forsake my home,
For him forsake this loved, this wealthy dome,
Long, long the scene of all my past delight,
And still to last, the vision of my night!”

Graceful she said, and bade Eumaeus show
The rival peers the ringlets and the bow.
From his full eyes the tears unbidden spring,
Touch’d at the dear memorials of his king.
Philaetius too relents, but secret shed
The tender drops. Antinous saw, and said:

“Hence to your fields, ye rustics! hence away,
Nor stain with grief the pleasures of the day;
Nor to the royal heart recall in vain
The sad remembrance of a perish’d man.
Enough her precious tears already flow—
Or share the feast with due respect; or go
To weep abroad, and leave to us the bow,
No vulgar task! Ill suits this courtly crew
That stubborn horn which brave Ulysses drew.
I well remember (for I gazed him o’er
While yet a child), what majesty he bore!
And still (all infant as I was) retain
The port, the strength, the grandeur of the man.”

He said, but in his soul fond joys arise,
And his proud hopes already win the prize.
To speed the flying shaft through every ring,
Wretch! is not thine: the arrows of the king
Shall end those hopes, and fate is on the wing!

Then thus Telemachus: “Some god I find
With pleasing frenzy has possess’d my mind;
When a loved mother threatens to depart,
Why with this ill-timed gladness leaps my heart?
Come then, ye suitors! and dispute a prize
Richer than all the Achaian state supplies,
Than all proud Argos, or Mycaena knows,
Than all our isles or continents inclose;
A woman matchless, and almost divine,
Fit for the praise of every tongue but mine.
No more excuses then, no more delay;
Haste to the trial—Lo! I lead the way.

“I too may try, and if this arm can wing
The feather’d arrow through the destined ring,
Then if no happier night the conquest boast,
I shall not sorrow for a mother lost;
But, bless’d in her, possess those arms alone,
Heir of my father’s strength, as well as throne.”

He spoke; then rising, his broad sword unbound,
And cast his purple garment on the ground.
A trench he open’d: in a line he placed.
The level axes, and the points made fast
(His perfect skill the wondering gazers eyed,
The game as yet unseen, as yet untried).
Then, with a manly pace, he took his stand:
And grasp’d the bow, and twang’d it in his hand.
Three times, with beating heart, he made essay:
Three times, unequal to the task, gave way;
A modest boldness on his cheek appear’d:
And thrice he hoped, and thrice again he fear’d.
The fourth had drawn it. The great sire with joy
Beheld, but with a sign forbade the boy.
His ardour straight the obedient prince suppress’d,
And, artful, thus the suitor-train address’d:

“O lay the cause on youth yet immature!
(For heaven forbid such weakness should endure!)
How shall this arm, unequal to the bow,
Retort an insult, or repel a foe?
But you! whom Heaven with better nerves has bless’d,
Accept the trial, and the prize contest.”

He cast the bow before him, and apart
Against the polish’d quiver propp’d the dart.
Resuming then his seat, Eupithes’ son,
The bold Antinous, to the rest begun:
“From where the goblet first begins to flow,
From right to left in order take the bow;
And prove your several strengths.” The princes heard
And first Leiodes, blameless priest, appear’d:
The eldest born of Œnops’ noble race,
Who next the goblet held his holy place:
He, only he, of all the suitor throng,
Their deeds detested, and abjured the wrong.
With tender hands the stubborn horn he strains,
The stubborn horn resisted all his pains!
Already in despair he gives it o’er:
“Take it who will (he cries), I strive no more,
What numerous deaths attend this fatal bow!
What souls and spirits shall it send below!
Better, indeed, to die, and fairly give
Nature her debt, than disappointed live,
With each new sun to some new hope a prey,
Yet still to-morrow falser than to-day.
How long in vain Penelope we sought!
This bow shall ease us of that idle thought,
And send us with some humbler wife to live,
Whom gold shall gain, or destiny shall give.”

Thus speaking, on the floor the bow he placed
(With rich inlay the various floor was graced):
At distance far the feather’d shaft he throws,
And to the seat returns from whence he rose.

To him Antinous thus with fury said:
“What words ill-omen’d from thy lips have fled?
Thy coward-function ever is in fear!
Those arms are dreadful which thou canst not bear,
Why should this bow be fatal to the brave?
Because the priest is born a peaceful slave.
Mark then what others can.” He ended there,
And bade Melanthius a vast pile prepare;
He gives it instant flame, then fast beside
Spreads o’er an ample board a bullock’s hide.
With melted lard they soak the weapon o’er,
Chafe every knot, and supple every pore.
Vain all their art, and all their strength as vain;
The bow inflexible resists their pain.
The force of great Eurymachus alone
And bold Antinous, yet untired, unknown:
Those only now remain’d; but those confess’d
Of all the train the mightiest and the best.

Then from the hall, and from the noisy crew,
The masters of the herd and flock withdrew.
The king observes them, he the hall forsakes,
And, past the limits of the court, o’ertakes.
Then thus with accent mild Ulysses spoke:
“Ye faithful guardians of the herd and flock!
Shall I the secret of my breast conceal,
Or (as my soul now dictates) shall I tell?
Say, should some favouring god restore again
The lost Ulysses to his native reign,
How beat your hearts? what aid would you afford
To the proud suitors, or your ancient lord?”

Philaetius thus: “O were thy word not vain!
Would mighty Jove restore that man again!
These aged sinews, with new vigour strung,
In his blest cause should emulate the young.”
With equal vows Eumaeus too implored
Each power above, with wishes for his lord.

He saw their secret souls, and thus began:
“Those vows the gods accord; behold the man!
Your own Ulysses! twice ten years detain’d
By woes and wanderings from this hapless land:
At length he comes; but comes despised, unknown,
And finding faithful you, and you alone.
All else have cast him from their very thought,
E’en in their wishes and their prayers forgot!
Hear then, my friends: If Jove this arm succeed,
And give yon impious revellers to bleed,
My care shall be to bless your future lives
With large possessions and with faithful wives;
Fast by my palace shall your domes ascend,
And each on young Telemachus attend,
And each be call’d his brother and my friend.
To give you firmer faith, now trust your eye;
Lo! the broad scar indented on my thigh,
When with Autolycus’ sons, of yore,
On Parnass’ top I chased the tusky boar.”
His ragged vest then drawn aside disclosed
The sign conspicuous, and the scar exposed:
Eager they view’d, with joy they stood amazed
With tearful eyes o’er all their master gazed:
Around his neck their longing arms they cast,
His head, his shoulders, and his knees embraced;
Tears followed tears; no word was in their power;
In solemn silence fell the kindly shower.
The king too weeps, the king too grasps their hands;
And moveless, as a marble fountain, stands.

Thus had their joy wept down the setting sun,
But first the wise man ceased, and thus begun:
“Enough—on other cares your thought employ,
For danger waits on all untimely joy.
Full many foes and fierce, observe us near;
Some may betray, and yonder walls may hear.
Re-enter then, not all at once, but stay
Some moments you, and let me lead the way.
To me, neglected as I am I know
The haughty suitors will deny the bow;
But thou, Eumaeus, as ’tis borne away,
Thy master’s weapon to his hand convey.
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate:
Close let them keep, whate’er invades their ear;
Though arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear.
To thy strict charge, Philaetius, we consign
The court’s main gate: to guard that pass be thine.”

This said, he first return’d; the faithful swains
At distance follow, as their king ordains.
Before the flame Eurymachus now stands,
And turns the bow, and chafes it with his hands
Still the tough bow unmoved. The lofty man
Sigh’d from his mighty soul, and thus began:

“I mourn the common cause: for, oh, my friends,
On me, on all, what grief, what shame attends!
Not the lost nuptials can affect me more
(For Greece has beauteous dames on every shore),
But baffled thus! confess’d so far below
Ulysses’ strength, as not to bend his bow!
How shall all ages our attempt deride!
Our weakness scorn!” Antinous thus replied:

“Not so, Eurymachus: that no man draws
The wondrous bow, attend another cause.
Sacred to Phœbus is the solemn day,
Which thoughtless we in games would waste away:
Till the next dawn this ill-timed strife forego,
And here leave fixed the ringlets in a row.
Now bid the sewer approach, and let us join
In due libations, and in rites divine,
So end our night: before the day shall spring,
The choicest offerings let Melanthius bring:
Let then to Phœbus’ name the fatted thighs
Feed the rich smokes high curling to the skies.
So shall the patron of these arts bestow
(For his the gift) the skill to bend the bow.”

They heard well pleased: the ready heralds bring
The cleansing waters from the limpid spring:
The goblet high with rosy wine they crown’d,
In order circling to the peers around.
That rite complete, uprose the thoughtful man,
And thus his meditated scheme began:

“If what I ask your noble minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in the royal love!
Chief, if it hurt not great Antinous’ ear
(Whose sage decision I with wonder hear),
And if Eurymachus the motion please:
Give Heaven this day and rest the bow in peace.
To-morrow let your arms dispute the prize,
And take it he, the favour’d of the skies!
But, since till then this trial you delay,
Trust it one moment to my hands to-day:
Fain would I prove, before your judging eyes,
What once I was, whom wretched you despise:
If yet this arm its ancient force retain;
Or if my woes (a long-continued train)
And wants and insults, make me less than man.”

Rage flash’d in lightning from the suitors’ eyes,
Yet mixed with terror at the bold emprise.
Antinous then: “O miserable guest!
Is common sense quite banish’d from thy breast?
Sufficed it not, within the palace placed,
To sit distinguish’d, with our presence graced,
Admitted here with princes to confer,
A man unknown, a needy wanderer?
To copious wine this insolence we owe,
And much thy betters wine can overthrow:
The great Eurytion, when this frenzy stung,
Pirithous’ roofs with frantic riot rung;
Boundless the Centaur raged; till one and all
The heroes rose, and dragg’d him from the hall;
His nose they shorten’d, and his ears they slit,
And sent him sober’d home, with better wit.
Hence with long war the double race was cursed,
Fatal to all, but to the aggressor first.
Such fate I prophesy our guest attends,
If here this interdicted bow he bends:
Nor shall these walls such insolence contain:
The first fair wind transports him o’er the main,
Where Echetus to death the guilty brings
(The worst of mortals, e’en the worst of kings).
Better than that, if thou approve our cheer;
Cease the mad strife and share our bounty here.”

To this the queen her just dislike express’d:

“‘Tis impious, prince, to harm the stranger-guest,
Base to insult who bears a suppliant’s name,
And some respect Telemachus may claim.
What if the immortals on the man bestow
Sufficient strength to draw the mighty bow?
Shall I, a queen, by rival chiefs adored,
Accept a wandering stranger for my lord?
A hope so idle never touch’d his brain:
Then ease your bosoms of a fear so vain.
Far be he banish’d from this stately scene
Who wrongs his princess with a thought so mean.”

“O fair! and wisest of so fair a kind!
(Respectful thus Eurymachus rejoin’d,)
Moved by no weak surmise, but sense of shame,
We dread the all-arraigning voice of Fame:
We dread the censure of the meanest slave,
The weakest woman: all can wrong the brave.
‘Behold what wretches to the bed pretend
Of that brave chief whose bow they could not bend!
In came a beggar of the strolling crew,
And did what all those princes could not do.’
Thus will the common voice our deed defame,
And thus posterity upbraid our name.”

To whom the queen: “If fame engage your views,
Forbear those acts which infamy pursues;
Wrong and oppression no renown can raise;
Know, friend! that virtue is the path to praise.
The stature of our guest, his port, his face,
Speak him descended from no vulgar race.
To him the bow, as he desires, convey;
And to his hand if Phœbus give the day,
Hence, to reward his merit, be shall bear
A two-edged falchion and a shining spear,
Embroider’d sandals, a rich cloak and vest,
A safe conveyance to his port of rest.”

“O royal mother! ever-honour’d name!
Permit me (cries Telemachus) to claim
A son’s just right. No Grecian prince but I
Has power this bow to grant or to deny.
Of all that Ithaca’s rough hills contain,
And all wide Elis’ courser-breeding plain,
To me alone my father’s arms descend;
And mine alone they are, to give or lend.
Retire, O queen! thy household task resume,
Tend, with thy maids, the labours of thy loom;
The bow, the darts, and arms of chivalry,
These cares to man belong, and most to me.”

Mature beyond his years, the queen admired
His sage reply, and with her train retired;
There in her chamber as she sate apart,
Revolved his words, and placed them in her heart.
On her Ulysses then she fix’d her soul;
Down her fair cheek the tears abundant roll,
Till gentle Pallas, piteous of her cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Now through the press the bow Eumaeus bore,
And all was riot, noise, and wild uproar.
“Hold! lawless rustic! whither wilt thou go?
To whom, insensate, dost thou bear the bow?
Exiled for this to some sequester’d den,
Far from the sweet society of men,
To thy own dogs a prey thou shalt be made;
If Heaven and Phœbus lend the suitors aid.”
Thus they. Aghast he laid the weapon down,
But bold Telemachus thus urged him on:
“Proceed, false slave, and slight their empty words:
What! hopes the fool to please so many lords?
Young as I am, thy prince’s vengeful hand
Stretch’d forth in wrath shall drive thee from the land.
Oh! could the vigour of this arm as well
The oppressive suitors from my walls expel!
Then what a shoal of lawless men should go
To fill with tumult the dark courts below!”

The suitors with a scornful smile survey
The youth, indulging in the genial day.
Eumaeus, thus encouraged, hastes to bring
The strifeful bow and gives it to the king.
Old Euryclea calling then aside,
“Hear what Telemachus enjoins (he cried):
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate;
And if unusual sounds invade their ear,
If arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear,
Let none to call or issue forth presume,
But close attend the labours of the loom.”

Her prompt obedience on his order waits;
Closed in an instant were the palace gates.
In the same moment forth Philaetius flies,
Secures the court, and with a cable ties
The utmost gate (the cable strongly wrought
Of Byblos’ reed, a ship from Egypt brought);
Then unperceived and silent at the board
His seat he takes, his eyes upon his lord.

And now his well-known bow the master bore,
Turn’d on all sides, and view’d it o’er and o’er;
Lest time or worms had done the weapon wrong,
Its owner absent, and untried so long.
While some deriding—“How he turns the bow!
Some other like it sure the man must know,
Or else would copy; or in bows he deals;
Perhaps he makes them, or perhaps he steals.”
“Heaven to this wretch (another cried) be kind!
And bless, in all to which he stands inclined.
With such good fortune as he now shall find.”

Heedless he heard them: but disdain’d reply;
The bow perusing with exactest eye.
Then, as some heavenly minstrel, taught to sing
High notes responsive to the trembling string,
To some new strain when he adapts the lyre,
Or the dumb lute refits with vocal wire,
Relaxes, strains, and draws them to and fro;
So the great master drew the mighty bow,
And drew with ease. One hand aloft display’d
The bending horns, and one the string essay’d.
From his essaying hand the string, let fly,
Twang’d short and sharp like the shrill swallow’s cry.
A general horror ran through all the race,
Sunk was each heart, and pale was every face,
Signs from above ensued: the unfolding sky
In lightning burst; Jove thunder’d from on high.
Fired at the call of heaven’s almighty Lord,
He snatch’d the shaft that glitter’d on the board
(Fast by, the rest lay sleeping in the sheath,
But soon to fly the messengers of death).

Now sitting as he was, the cord he drew,
Through every ringlet levelling his view:
Then notch’d the shaft, released, and gave it wing;
The whizzing arrow vanished from the string,
Sung on direct, and threaded every ring.
The solid gate its fury scarcely bounds;
Pierced through and through the solid gate resounds,
Then to the prince: “Nor have I wrought thee shame;
Nor err’d this hand unfaithful to its aim;
Nor prov’d the toil too hard; nor have I lost
That ancient vigour, once my pride and boast.
Ill I deserved these haughty peers’ disdain;
Now let them comfort their dejected train,
In sweet repast their present hour employ,
Nor wait till evening for the genial joy:
Then to the lute’s soft voice prolong the night;
Music, the banquet’s most refined delight.”

He said, then gave a nod; and at the word
Telemachus girds on his shining sword.
Fast by his father’s side he takes his stand:
The beamy javelin lightens in his hand.




BOOK XXII.


ARGUMENT.
THE DEATH OF THE SUITORS.


Ulysses begins the slaughter of the suitors by the death of Antinous.
He declares himself, and lets fly his arrows at the rest. Telemachus
assists and brings arms for his father, himself, Eumaeus, and
Philaetius. Melanthius does the same for the wooers. Minerva encourages
Ulysses in the shape of Mentor. The suitors are all slain, only Medon
and Phemius are spared. Melanthius and the unfaithful servants are
executed. The rest acknowledge their master with all demonstrations of
joy.


Then fierce the hero o’er the threshold strode;
Stripp’d of his rags, he blazed out like a god.
Full in their face the lifted bow he bore,
And quiver’d deaths, a formidable store;
Before his feet the rattling shower he threw,
And thus, terrific, to the suitor-crew:

“One venturous game this hand hath won to-day,
Another, princes! yet remains to play;
Another mark our arrow must attain.
Phœbus, assist! nor be the labour vain.”
Swift as the word the parting arrow sings,
And bears thy fate, Antinous, on its wings:
Wretch that he was, of unprophetic soul!
High in his hands he rear’d the golden bowl!
E’en then to drain it lengthen’d out his breath;
Changed to the deep, the bitter draught of death:
For fate who fear’d amidst a feastful band?
And fate to numbers, by a single hand?
Full through his throat Ulysses’ weapon pass’d,
And pierced his neck. He falls, and breathes his last.
The tumbling goblet the wide floor o’erflows,
A stream of gore burst spouting from his nose;
Grim in convulsive agonies be sprawls:
Before him spurn’d the loaded table falls,
And spreads the pavement with a mingled flood
Of floating meats, and wine, and human blood.
Amazed, confounded, as they saw him fall,
Up rose the throngs tumultuous round the hall:
O’er all the dome they cast a haggard eye,
Each look’d for arms—in vain; no arms were nigh:
“Aim’st thou at princes? (all amazed they said;)
Thy last of games unhappy hast thou play’d;
Thy erring shaft has made our bravest bleed,
And death, unlucky guest, attends thy deed.
Vultures shall tear thee.” Thus incensed they spoke,
While each to chance ascribed the wondrous stroke:
Blind as they were: for death e’en now invades
His destined prey, and wraps them all in shades.
Then, grimly frowning, with a dreadful look,
That wither’d all their hearts, Ulysses spoke:

“Dogs, ye have had your day! ye fear’d no more
Ulysses vengeful from the Trojan shore;
While, to your lust and spoil a guardless prey,
Our house, our wealth, our helpless handmaids lay:
Not so content, with bolder frenzy fired,
E’en to our bed presumptuous you aspired:
Laws or divine or human fail’d to move,
Or shame of men, or dread of gods above;
Heedless alike of infamy or praise,
Or Fame’s eternal voice in future days;
The hour of vengeance, wretches, now is come;
Impending fate is yours, and instant doom.”

Thus dreadful he. Confused the suitors stood,
From their pale cheeks recedes the flying blood:
Trembling they sought their guilty heads to hide.
Alone the bold Eurymachus replied:

“If, as thy words import (he thus began),
Ulysses lives, and thou the mighty man,
Great are thy wrongs, and much hast thou sustain’d
In thy spoil’d palace, and exhausted land;
The cause and author of those guilty deeds,
Lo! at thy feet unjust Antinous bleeds
Not love, but wild ambition was his guide;
To slay thy son, thy kingdom to divide,
These were his aims; but juster Jove denied.
Since cold in death the offender lies, oh spare
Thy suppliant people, and receive their prayer!
Brass, gold, and treasures, shall the spoil defray,
Two hundred oxen every prince shall pay:
The waste of years refunded in a day.
Till then thy wrath is just.” Ulysses burn’d
With high disdain, and sternly thus return’d:

“All, all the treasure that enrich’d our throne
Before your rapines, join’d with all your own,
If offer’d, vainly should for mercy call;
’Tis you that offer, and I scorn them all;
Your blood is my demand, your lives the prize,
Till pale as yonder wretch each suitor lies.
Hence with those coward terms; or fight or fly;
This choice is left you, to resist or die:
And die I trust ye shall.” He sternly spoke:
With guilty fears the pale assembly shook.
Alone Eurymachus exhorts the train:
“Yon archer, comrades, will not shoot in vain;
But from the threshold shall his darts be sped,
(Whoe’er he be), till every prince lie dead?
Be mindful of yourselves, draw forth your swords,
And to his shafts obtend these ample boards
(So need compels). Then, all united, strive
The bold invader from his post to drive:
The city roused shall to our rescue haste,
And this mad archer soon have shot his last.”

Swift as he spoke, he drew his traitor sword,
And like a lion rush’d against his lord:
The wary chief the rushing foe repress’d,
Who met the point and forced it in his breast:
His falling hand deserts the lifted sword,
And prone he falls extended o’er the board!
Before him wide, in mix’d effusion roll
The untasted viands, and the jovial bowl.
Full through his liver pass’d the mortal wound,
With dying rage his forehead beats the ground;
He spurn’d the seat with fury as he fell,
And the fierce soul to darkness dived, and hell.
Next bold Amphinomus his arm extends
To force the pass; the godlike man defends.
Thy spear, Telemachus, prevents the attack,
The brazen weapon driving through his back.
Thence through his breast its bloody passage tore;
Flat falls he thundering on the marble floor,
And his crush’d forehead marks the stone with gore.
He left his javelin in the dead, for fear
The long encumbrance of the weighty spear
To the fierce foe advantage might afford,
To rush between and use the shorten’d sword.
With speedy ardour to his sire he flies,
And, “Arm, great father! arm (in haste he cries).
Lo, hence I run for other arms to wield,
For missive javelins, and for helm and shield;
Fast by our side let either faithful swain
In arms attend us, and their part sustain.”

“Haste, and return (Ulysses made reply)
While yet the auxiliar shafts this hand supply;
Lest thus alone, encounter’d by an host,
Driven from the gate, the important past be lost.”

With speed Telemachus obeys, and flies
Where piled in heaps the royal armour lies;
Four brazen helmets, eight refulgent spears,
And four broad bucklers to his sire he bears:
At once in brazen panoply they shone.
At once each servant braced his armour on;
Around their king a faithful guard they stand.
While yet each shaft flew deathful from his hand:
Chief after chief expired at every wound,
And swell’d the bleeding mountain on the ground.
Soon as his store of flying fates was spent.
Against the wall he set the bow unbent;
And now his shoulders bear the massy shield,
And now his hands two beamy javelins wield:
He frowns beneath his nodding plume, that play’d
O’er the high crest, and cast a dreadful shade.

There stood a window near, whence looking down
From o’er the porch appear’d the subject town.
A double strength of valves secured the place,
A high and narrow, but the only pass:
The cautious king, with all-preventing care,
To guard that outlet, placed Eumaeus there;
When Agelaus thus: “Has none the sense
To mount yon window, and alarm from thence
The neighbour-town? the town shall force the door,
And this bold archer soon shall shoot no more.”
Melanthius then: “That outlet to the gate
So near adjoins, that one may guard the strait.
But other methods of defence remain;
Myself with arms can furnish all the train;
Stores from the royal magazine I bring,
And their own darts shall pierce the prince and king.”

He said; and mounting up the lofty stairs,
Twelve shields, twelve lances, and twelve helmets bears:
All arm, and sudden round the hall appears
A blaze of bucklers, and a wood of spears.

The hero stands oppress’d with mighty woe,
On every side he sees the labour grow;
“Oh cursed event! and oh unlook’d for aid!
Melanthius or the women have betray’d—
Oh my dear son!”—The father with a sigh
Then ceased; the filial virtue made reply;

“Falsehood is folly, and ’tis just to own
The fault committed: this was mine alone;
My haste neglected yonder door to bar,
And hence the villain has supplied their war.
Run, good Eumaeus, then, and (what before
I thoughtless err’d in) well secure that door:
Learn, if by female fraud this deed were done,
Or (as my thought misgives) by Dolius’ son.”

While yet they spoke, in quest of arms again
To the high chamber stole the faithless swain,
Not unobserved. Eumaeus watchful eyed,
And thus address’d Ulysses near his side:

“The miscreant we suspected takes that way;
Him, if this arm be powerful, shall I slay?
Or drive him hither, to receive the meed
From thy own hand, of this detested deed?”

“Not so (replied Ulysses); leave him there,
For us sufficient is another care;
Within the structure of this palace wall
To keep enclosed his masters till they fall.
Go you, and seize the felon; backward bind
His arms and legs, and fix a plank behind:
On this his body by strong cords extend,
And on a column near the roof suspend:
So studied tortures his vile days shall end.”

The ready swains obey’d with joyful haste,
Behind the felon unperceived they pass’d,
As round the room in quest of arms he goes
(The half-shut door conceal’d his lurking foes):
One hand sustain’d a helm, and one the shield
Which old Laertes wont in youth to wield,
Cover’d with dust, with dryness chapp’d and worn,
The brass corroded, and the leather torn.
Thus laden, o’er the threshold as he stepp’d,
Fierce on the villain from each side they leap’d,
Back by the hair the trembling dastard drew,
And down reluctant on the pavement threw.
Active and pleased the zealous swains fulfil
At every point their master’s rigid will;
First, fast behind, his hands and feet they bound,
Then straighten’d cords involved his body round;
So drawn aloft, athwart the column tied,
The howling felon swung from side to side.

Eumaeus scoffing then with keen disdain:
“There pass thy pleasing night, O gentle swain!
On that soft pillow, from that envied height,
First may’st thou see the springing dawn of light;
So timely rise, when morning streaks the east,
To drive thy victims to the suitors’ feast.”

This said, they, left him, tortured as he lay,
Secured the door, and hasty strode away:
Each, breathing death, resumed his dangerous post
Near great Ulysses; four against an host,
When lo! descending to her hero’s aid,
Jove’s daughter, Pallas, War’s triumphant maid:
In Mentor’s friendly form she join’d his side:
Ulysses saw, and thus with transport cried:

“Come, ever welcome, and thy succour lend;
O every sacred name in one, my friend!
Early we loved, and long our loves have grown;
Whate’er through life’s whole series I have done,
Or good, or grateful, now to mind recall,
And, aiding this one hour, repay it all.”

Thus he; but pleasing hopes his bosom warm
Of Pallas latent in the friendly form.
The adverse host the phantom-warrior eyed,
And first, loud-threatening, Agelaus cried:

“Mentor, beware, nor let that tongue persuade
Thy frantic arm to lend Ulysses aid;
Our force successful shall our threat make good,
And with the sire and son commix thy blood.
What hopest thou here? Thee first the sword shall slay,
Then lop thy whole posterity away;
Far hence thy banish’d consort shall we send;
With his thy forfeit lands and treasures blend;
Thus, and thus only, shalt thou join thy friend.”

His barbarous insult even the goddess fires,
Who thus the warrior to revenge inspires:

“Art thou Ulysses? where then shall we find
The patient body and the constant mind?
That courage, once the Trojans’ daily dread,
Known nine long years, and felt by heroes dead?
And where that conduct, which revenged the lust
Of Priam’s race, and laid proud Troy in dust?
If this, when Helen was the cause, were done;
What for thy country now, thy queen, thy son?
Rise then in combat, at my side attend;
Observe what vigour gratitude can lend,
And foes how weak, opposed against a friend!”

She spoke; but willing longer to survey
The sire and son’s great acts withheld the day!
By farther toils decreed the brave to try,
And level poised the wings of victory;
Then with a change of form eludes their sight,
Perch’d like a swallow on a rafter’s height,
And unperceived enjoys the rising fight.

Damastor’s son, bold Agelaus, leads,
The guilty war, Eurynomus succeeds;
With these, Pisander, great Polyctor’s son,
Sage Polybus, and stern Amphimedon,
With Demoptolemus: these six survive:
The best of all the shafts had left alive.
Amidst the carnage, desperate as they stand,
Thus Agelaus roused the lagging band:

“The hour has come, when yon fierce man no more
With bleeding princes shall bestrew the floor;
Lo! Mentor leaves him with an empty boast;
The four remain, but four against an host.
Let each at once discharge the deadly dart,
One sure of six shall reach Ulysses’ heart:
The rest must perish, their great leader slain:
Thus shall one stroke the glory lost regain.”

Then all at once their mingled lances threw,
And thirsty all of one man’s blood they flew;
In vain! Minerva turned them with her breath,
And scattered short, or wide, the points of death!
With deaden’d sound one on the threshold falls,
One strikes the gate, one rings against the walls:
The storm passed innocent. The godlike man
Now loftier trod, and dreadful thus began:
“‘Tis now (brave friends) our turn, at once to throw,
(So speed them Heaven) our javelins at the foe.
That impious race to all their past misdeeds
Would add our blood, injustice still proceeds.”

He spoke: at once their fiery lances flew:
Great Demoptolemus Ulysses slew;
Euryades received the prince’s dart;
The goatherd’s quiver’d in Pisander’s heart;
Fierce Elatus by thine, Eumaeus, falls;
Their fall in thunder echoes round the walls.
The rest retreat: the victors now advance,
Each from the dead resumes his bloody lance.
Again the foe discharge the steely shower;
Again made frustrate by the virgin-power.
Some, turn’d by Pallas, on the threshold fall,
Some wound the gate, some ring against the wall;
Some weak, or ponderous with the brazen head,
Drop harmless on the pavement, sounding dead.

Then bold Amphimedon his javelin cast:
Thy hand, Telemachus, it lightly razed:
And from Ctesippus’ arm the spear elanced:
On good Eumaeus’ shield and shoulder glanced;
Not lessened of their force (so light the wound)
Each sung along and dropped upon the ground.
Fate doom’d thee next, Eurydamus, to bear,
Thy death ennobled by Ulysses’ spear.
By the bold son Amphimedon was slain,
And Polybus renown’d, the faithful swain.
Pierced through the breast the rude Ctesippus bled,
And thus Philaetius gloried o’er the dead:

“There end thy pompous vaunts and high disdain;
O sharp in scandal, voluble and vain!
How weak is mortal pride! To Heaven alone
The event of actions and our fates are known:
Scoffer, behold what gratitude we bear:
The victim’s heel is answered with this spear.”

Ulysses brandish’d high his vengeful steel,
And Damastorides that instant fell:
Fast by Leocritus expiring lay,
The prince’s javelin tore its bloody way
Through all his bowels: down he tumbled prone,
His batter’d front and brains besmear the stone.

Now Pallas shines confess’d; aloft she spreads
The arm of vengeance o’er their guilty heads:
The dreadful aegis blazes in their eye:
Amazed they see, they tremble, and they fly:
Confused, distracted, through the rooms they fling:
Like oxen madden’d by the breeze’s sting,
When sultry days, and long, succeed the gentle spring,
Not half so keen fierce vultures of the chase
Stoop from the mountains on the feather’d race,
When, the wide field extended snares beset,
With conscious dread they shun the quivering net:
No help, no flight; but wounded every way,
Headlong they drop; the fowlers seize their prey.
On all sides thus they double wound on wound,
In prostrate heaps the wretches beat the ground,
Unmanly shrieks precede each dying groan,
And a red deluge floats the reeking stone.

Leiodes first before the victor falls:
The wretched augur thus for mercy calls:
“Oh gracious hear, nor let thy suppliant bleed;
Still undishonoured, or by word or deed,
Thy house, for me remains; by me repress’d
Full oft was check’d the injustice of the rest:
Averse they heard me when I counselled well,
Their hearts were harden’d, and they justly fell.
O spare an augur’s consecrated head,
Nor add the blameless to the guilty dead.”

“Priest as thou art! for that detested band
Thy lying prophecies deceived the land;
Against Ulysses have thy vows been made,
For them thy daily orisons were paid:
Yet more, e’en to our bed thy pride aspires:
One common crime one common fate requires.”

Thus speaking, from the ground the sword he took
Which Agelaus’ dying hand forsook:
Full through his neck the weighty falchion sped;
Along the pavement roll’d the muttering head.

Phemius alone the hand of vengeance spared,
Phemius the sweet, the heaven-instructed bard.
Beside the gate the reverend minstrel stands;
The lyre now silent trembling in his hands;
Dubious to supplicate the chief, or fly
To Jove’s inviolable altar nigh,
Where oft Laertes holy vows had paid,
And oft Ulysses smoking victims laid.
His honour’d harp with care he first set down,
Between the laver and the silver throne;
Then prostrate stretch’d before the dreadful man,
Persuasive thus, with accent soft began:

“O king! to mercy be thy soul inclined,
And spare the poet’s ever-gentle kind.
A deed like this thy future fame would wrong,
For dear to gods and men is sacred song.
Self-taught I sing; by Heaven, and Heaven alone,
The genuine seeds of poesy are sown:
And (what the gods bestow) the lofty lay
To gods alone and godlike worth we pay.
Save then the poet, and thyself reward!
’Tis thine to merit, mine is to record.
That here I sung, was force, and not desire;
This hand reluctant touch’d the warbling wire;
And let thy son attest, nor sordid pay,
Nor servile flattery, stain’d the moral lay.”

The moving words Telemachus attends,
His sire approaches, and the bard defends.
“O mix not, father, with those impious dead
The man divine! forbear that sacred head;
Medon, the herald, too, our arms may spare,
Medon, who made my infancy his care;
If yet he breathes, permit thy son to give
Thus much to gratitude, and bid him live.”

Beneath a table, trembling with dismay,
Couch’d close to earth, unhappy Medon lay,
Wrapp’d in a new-slain ox’s ample hide;
Swift at the word he cast his screen aside,
Sprung to the prince, embraced his knee with tears,
And thus with grateful voice address’d his ears

“O prince! O friend! lo, here thy Medon stands
Ah stop the hero’s unresisted hands,
Incensed too justly by that impious brood,
Whose guilty glories now are set in blood.”
To whom Ulysses with a pleasing eye:

“Be bold, on friendship and my son rely;
Live, an example for the world to read,
How much more safe the good than evil deed:
Thou, with the heaven-taught bard, in peace resort
From blood and carnage to yon open court:
Me other work requires.” With timorous awe
From the dire scene the exempted two withdraw,
Scarce sure of life, look round, and trembling move
To the bright altars of Protector Jove.

Meanwhile Ulysses search’d the dome, to find
If yet there live of all the offending kind.
Not one! complete the bloody tale he found,
All steep’d in blood, all gasping on the ground.
So, when by hollow shores the fisher-train
Sweep with their arching nets the roaring main,
And scarce the meshy toils the copious draught contain,
All naked of their element, and bare,
The fishes pant, and gasp in thinner air;
Wide o’er the sands are spread the stiffening prey,
Till the warm sun exhales their soul away.

And now the king commands his son to call
Old Euryclea to the deathful hall:
The son observant not a moment stays;
The aged governess with speed obeys;
The sounding portals instant they display;
The matron moves, the prince directs the way.
On heaps of death the stern Ulysses stood,
All black with dust, and cover’d thick with blood.
So the grim lion from the slaughter comes,
Dreadful he glares, and terribly he foams,
His breast with marks of carnage painted o’er,
His jaws all dropping with the bull’s black gore.

Soon as her eyes the welcome object met,
The guilty fall’n, the mighty deed complete;
A scream of joy her feeble voice essay’d;
The hero check’d her, and composedly said.

“Woman, experienced as thou art, control
Indecent joy, and feast thy secret soul.
To insult the dead is cruel and unjust;
Fate and their crime have sunk them to the dust.
Nor heeded these the censure of mankind,
The good and bad were equal in their mind
Justly the price of worthlessness they paid,
And each now wails an unlamented shade.
But thou sincere! O Euryclea, say,
What maids dishonour us, and what obey?”

Then she: “In these thy kingly walls remain
(My son) full fifty of the handmaid train,
Taught by my care to cull the fleece or weave,
And servitude with pleasing tasks deceive;
Of these, twice six pursue their wicked way,
Nor me, nor chaste Penelope obey;
Nor fits it that Telemachus command
(Young as he is) his mother’s female band.
Hence to the upper chambers let me fly
Where slumbers soft now close the royal eye;
There wake her with the news”—the matron cried.
“Not so (Ulysses, more sedate, replied),
Bring first the crew who wrought these guilty deeds.”
In haste the matron parts: the king proceeds;
“Now to dispose the dead, the care remains
To you, my son, and you, my faithfull swains;
The offending females to that task we doom,
To wash, to scent, and purify the room;
These (every table cleansed, and every throne,
And all the melancholy labour done)
Drive to yon court, without the palace wall,
There the revenging sword shall smite them all;
So with the suitors let them mix in dust,
Stretch’d in a long oblivion of their lust.”
He said: the lamentable train appear,
Each vents a groan, and drops a tender tear;
Each heaved her mournful burden, and beneath
The porch deposed the ghastly heap of death.
The chief severe, compelling each to move,
Urged the dire task imperious from above;
With thirsty sponge they rub the tables o’er
(The swains unite their toil); the walls, the floor,
Wash’d with the effusive wave, are purged of gore.
Once more the palace set in fair array,
To the base court the females take their way;
There compass’d close between the dome and wall
(Their life’s last scene) they trembling wait their fall.

Then thus the prince: “To these shall we afford
A fate so pure as by the martial sword?
To these, the nightly prostitutes to shame,
And base revilers of our house and name?”

Thus speaking, on the circling wall he strung
A ship’s tough cable from a column hung;
Near the high top he strain’d it strongly round,
Whence no contending foot could reach the ground.
Their heads above connected in a row,
They beat the air with quivering feet below:
Thus on some tree hung struggling in the snare,
The doves or thrushes flap their wings in air.
Soon fled the soul impure, and left behind
The empty corse to waver with the wind.

Then forth they led Melanthius, and began
Their bloody work; they lopp’d away the man,
Morsel for dogs! then trimm’d with brazen shears
The wretch, and shorten’d of his nose and ears;
His hands and feet last felt the cruel steel:
He roar’d, and torments gave his soul to hell.
They wash, and to Ulysses take their way:
So ends the bloody business of the day.

To Euryclea then address’d the king:
“Bring hither fire, and hither sulphur bring,
To purge the palace: then the queen attend,
And let her with her matron-train descend;
The matron-train, with all the virgin-band,
Assemble here, to learn their lord’s command.”

Then Euryclea: “Joyful I obey,
But cast those mean dishonest rags away;
Permit me first the royal robes to bring:
Ill suits this garb the shoulders of a king.”
“Bring sulphur straight, and fire” (the monarch cries).
She hears, and at the word obedient flies.
With fire and sulphur, cure of noxious fumes,
He purged the walls, and blood-polluted rooms.
Again the matron springs with eager pace,
And spreads her lord’s return from place to place.
They hear, rush forth, and instant round him stand,
A gazing throng, a torch in every hand.
They saw, they knew him, and with fond embrace
Each humbly kiss’d his knee, or hand, or face;
He knows them all, in all such truth appears,
E’en he indulges the sweet joy of tears.




BOOK XXIII.


ARGUMENT.


Euryclea awakens Penelope with the news of Ulysses’ return, and the
death of the suitors. Penelope scarcely credits her; but supposes some
god has punished them, and descends from her department in doubt. At
the first interview of Ulysses and Penelope, she is quite unsatisfied.
Minerva restores him to the beauty of his youth; but the queen
continues incredulous, till by some circumstances she is convinced, and
falls into all the transports of passion and tenderness. They recount
to each other all that has passed during their long separation. The
next morning Ulysses, arming himself and his friends, goes from the
city to visit his father.


Then to the queen, as in repose she lay,
The nurse with eager rapture speeds her way:
The transports of her faithful heart supply
A sudden youth, and give her wings to fly.

“And sleeps my child? (the reverend matron cries)
Ulysses lives! arise, my child, arise!
At length appears the long-expected hour!
Ulysses comes! the suitors are no more!
No more they view the golden light of day!
Arise, and bless thee with the glad survey?”

Touch’d at her words, the mournful queen rejoin’d:
“Ah! whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?
The righteous powers, who tread the starry skies,
The weak enlighten, and confound the wise,
And human thought, with unresisted sway,
Depress or raise, enlarge or take away:
Truth, by their high decree, thy voice forsakes,
And folly with the tongue of wisdom speaks.
Unkind, the fond illusion to impose!
Was it to flatter or deride my woes?
Never did I sleep so sweet enjoy,
Since my dear lord left Ithaca for Troy.
Why must I wake to grieve, and curse thy shore,
O Troy?—may never tongue pronounce thee more!
Begone! another might have felt our rage,
But age is sacred, and we spare thy age.”

To whom with warmth: “My soul a lie disdains;
Ulysses lives, thy own Ulysses reigns:
That stranger, patient of the suitors’ wrongs,
And the rude license of ungovern’d tongues!
He, he is thine! Thy son his latent guest
Long knew, but lock’d the secret in his breast:
With well concerted art to end his woes,
And burst at once in vengeance on the foes.”

While yet she spoke, the queen in transport sprung
Swift from the couch, and round the matron hung;
Fast from her eye descends the rolling tear:
“Say, once more say, is my Ulysses here?
How could that numerous and outrageous band
By one be slain, though by a hero’s hand?”

“I saw it not (she cries), but heard alone,
When death was busy, a loud dying groan;
The damsel-train turn’d pale at every wound,
Immured we sate, and catch’d each passing sound;
When death had seized her prey, thy son attends,
And at his nod the damsel-train descends;
There terrible in arms Ulysses stood,
And the dead suitors almost swam in blood:
Thy heart had leap’d the hero to survey,
Stern as the surly lion o’er his prey,
Glorious in gore, now with sulphereous fire
The dome he purges, now the flame aspires;
Heap’d lie the dead without the palace walls—
Haste, daughter, haste, thy own Ulysses calls!
Thy every wish the bounteous gods bestow;
Enjoy the present good, and former woe.
Ulysses lives, his vanquish’d foes to see;
He lives to thy Telemachus and thee!”

“Ah, no! (with sighs Penelope rejoin’d,)
Excess of joy disturbs thy wandering mind;
How blest this happy hour, should he appear,
Dear to us all, to me supremely dear;
Ah, no! some god the suitors death decreed,
Some god descends, and by his hand they bleed;
Blind! to contemn the stranger’s righteous cause,
And violate all hospitable laws!
The good they hated, and the powers defied!
But heaven is just, and by a god they died.
For never must Ulysses view this shore;
Never! the loved Ulysses is no more!”

“What words (the matron cries) have reach’d my ears?
Doubt we his presence, when he now appears!
Then hear conviction: Ere the fatal day
That forced Ulysses o’er the watery way,
A boar, fierce rushing in the sylvan war,
Plough’d half his thigh; I saw, I saw the scar,
And wild with transport had reveal’d the wound;
But ere I spoke, he rose, and check’d the sound.
Then, daughter, haste away! and if a lie
Flow from this tongue, then let thy servant die!”
To whom with dubious joy the queen replies:
“Wise is thy soul, but errors seize the wise;
The works of gods what mortal can survey?
Who knows their motives, who shall trace their way?
But learn we instant how the suitors trod
The paths of death, by man, or by a god.”
Thus speaks the queen, and no reply attends,
But with alternate joy and fear descends;
At every step debates her lord to prove;
Or, rushing to his arms, confess her love!
Then gliding through the marble valves, in state
Opposed, before the shining sire she sate.
The monarch, by a column high enthroned,
His eye withdrew, and fix’d it on the ground;
Curious to hear his queen the silence break:
Amazed she sate, and impotent to speak;
O’er all the man her eyes she rolls in vain,
Now hopes, now fears, now knows, then doubts again.
At length Telemachus: “Oh, who can find
A woman like Penelope unkind?
Why thus in silence? why with winning charms
Thus slow to fly with rapture to his arms?
Stubborn the breast that with no transport glows,
When twice ten years are pass’d of mighty woes;
To softness lost, to spousal love unknown,
The gods have formed that rigid heart of stone!”
“O my Telemachus! (the queen rejoin’d,)
Distracting fears confound my labouring mind;
Powerless to speak. I scarce uplift my eyes,
Nor dare to question; doubts on doubts arise.
Oh deign he, if Ulysses, to remove
These boding thoughts, and what he is, to prove!”
Pleased with her virtuous fears, the king replies:
“Indulge, my son, the cautions of the wise;
Time shall the truth to sure remembrance bring:
This garb of poverty belies the king:
No more. This day our deepest care requires,
Cautious to act what thought mature inspires.
If one man’s blood, though mean, distain our hands,
The homicide retreats to foreign lands;
By us, in heaps the illustrious peerage falls,
The important deed our whole attention calls.”

“Be that thy care (Telemachus replies)
The world conspires to speak Ulysses wise;
For wisdom all is thine! lo, I obey,
And dauntless follow where you led the way;
Nor shalt thou in the day of danger find
Thy coward son degenerate lag behind.”

“Then instant to the bath (the monarch cries),
Bid the gay youth and sprightly virgins rise,
Thence all descend in pomp and proud array,
And bid the dome resound the mirthful lay;
While the sweet lyrist airs of rapture sings,
And forms the dance responsive to the strings,
That hence the eluded passengers may say,
‘Lo! the queen weds! we hear the spousal lay!’
The suitor’s death, unknown, till we remove
Far from the court, and act inspired by Jove.”

Thus spoke the king: the observant train obey,
At once they bathe, and dress in proud array:
The lyrist strikes the string; gay youths advance,
And fair-zoned damsels form the sprightly dance.
The voice, attuned to instrumental sounds,
Ascends the roof, the vaulted roof rebounds;
Not unobserved: the Greeks eluded say,
“Lo! the queen weds, we hear the spousal lay!
Inconstant! to admit the bridal hour.”
Thus they—but nobly chaste she weds no more.

Meanwhile the wearied king the bath ascends;
With faithful cares Eurynome attends,
O’er every limb a shower of fragrance sheds;
Then, dress’d in pomp, magnificent he treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and grace divine.
Back from his brows in wavy ringlets fly
His thick large locks of hyacinthine dye.
As by some artist to whom Vulcan gives
His heavenly skill, a breathing image lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And the pale silver glows with fusile gold:
So Pallas his heroic form improves
With bloom divine, and like a god he moves!
More high he treads, and issuing forth in state,
Radiant before his gazing consort sate.
“And, O my queen! (he cries) what power above
Has steel’d that heart, averse to spousal love?
Canst thou, Penelope, when heaven restores
Thy lost Ulysses to his native shores,
Canst thou, O cruel! unconcern’d survey
Thy lost Ulysses, on this signal day?
Haste, Euryclea, and despatchful spread
For me, and me alone, the imperial bed,
My weary nature craves the balm of rest.
But Heaven with adamant has arm’d her breast.”

“Ah no! (she cries) a tender heart I bear,
A foe to pride: no adamant is there;
And now, e’en now it melts! for sure I see
Once more Ulysses my beloved in thee!
Fix’d in my soul, as when he sailed to Troy,
His image dwells: then haste the bed of joy,
Haste, from the bridal bower the bed translate,
Fram’d by his hand, and be it dress’d in state!”

Thus speaks the queen, still dubious, with disguise
Touch’d at her words, the king with warmth replies
“Alas for this! what mortal strength can move
The enormous burden, who but Heaven above?
It mocks the weak attempts of human hands!
But the whole earth must move if Heaven commands
Then hear sure evidence, while we display
Words seal’d with sacred truth and truth obey:
This hand the wonder framed; an olive spread
Full in the court its ever verdant head.
Vast as some mighty column’s bulk, on high
The huge trunk rose, and heaved into the sky;
Around the tree I raised a nuptial bower,
And roof’d defensive of the storm and shower;
The spacious valve, with art inwrought conjoins;
And the fair dome with polished marble shines.
I lopp’d the branchy head: aloft in twain
Sever’d the bole, and smoothed the shining grain;
Then posts, capacious of the frame, I raise,
And bore it, regular, from space to space:
Athwart the frame, at equal distance lie
Thongs of tough hides, that boast a purple dye;
Then polishing the whole, the finished mould
With silver shone, with elephant, and gold.
But if o’erturn’d by rude, ungovern’d hands,
Or still inviolate the olive stands,
’Tis thine, O queen, to say, and now impart,
If fears remain, or doubts distract thy heart.”

While yet he speaks, her powers of life decay;
She sickens, trembles, falls, and faints away.
At length recovering, to his arms she flew,
And strain’d him close, as to his breast she grew.
The tears pour’d down amain, and “O (she cries)
Let not against thy spouse thine anger rise!
O versed in every turn of human art,
Forgive the weakness of a woman’s heart!
The righteous powers, that mortal lot dispose,
Decree us to sustain a length of woes.
And from the flower of life the bliss deny
To bloom together, fade away, and die.
O let me, let me not thine anger move,
That I forbore, thus, thus to speak my love:
Thus in fond kisses, while the transport warms
Pour out my soul and die within thine arms!
I dreaded fraud! Men, faithless men, betray
Our easy faith, and make our sex their prey:
Against the fondness of my heart I strove:
’Twas caution, O my lord! not want of love.
Like me had Helen fear’d, with wanton charms
Ere the fair mischief set two worlds in arms;
Ere Greece rose dreadful in the avenging day;
Thus had she fear’d, she had not gone astray.
But Heaven, averse to Greece, in wrath decreed
That she should wander, and that Greece should bleed:
Blind to the ills that from injustice flow,
She colour’d all our wretched lives with woe.
But why these sorrows when my lord arrives?
I yield, I yield! my own Ulysses lives!
The secrets of the bridal bed are known
To thee, to me, to Actoris alone
(My father’s present in the spousal hour,
The sole attendant on our genial bower).
Since what no eye hath seen thy tongue reveal’d,
Hard and distrustful as I am, I yield.”

Touch’d to the soul, the king with rapture hears,
Hangs round her neck, and speaks his joy in tears.
As to the shipwreck’d mariner, the shores
Delightful rise, when angry Neptune roars:
Then, when the surge in thunder mounts the sky,
And gulf’d in crowds at once the sailors die;
If one, more happy, while the tempest raves,
Outlives the tumult of conflicting waves,
All pale, with ooze deform’d, he views the strand,
And plunging forth with transport grasps the land:
The ravish’d queen with equal rapture glows,
Clasps her loved lord, and to his bosom grows.
Nor had they ended till the morning ray,
But Pallas backward held the rising day,
The wheels of night retarding, to detain
The gay Aurora in the wavy main;
Whose flaming steeds, emerging through the night,
Beam o’er the eastern hills with streaming light.

At length Ulysses with a sigh replies:
“Yet Fate, yet cruel Fate repose denies;
A labour long, and hard, remains behind;
By heaven above, by hell beneath enjoin’d:
For to Tiresias through the eternal gates
Of hell I trode, to learn my future fates.
But end we here—the night demands repose,
Be deck’d the couch! and peace awhile, my woes!”

To whom the queen: “Thy word we shall obey,
And deck the couch; far hence be woes away:
Since the just gods, who tread the starry plains,
Restore thee safe, since my Ulysses reigns.
But what those perils heaven decrees, impart;
Knowledge may grieve, but fear distracts the heart.”

To this the king: “Ah, why must I disclose
A dreadful story of approaching woes?
Why in this hour of transport wound thy ears,
When thou must learn what I must speak with tears?
Heaven, by the Theban ghost, thy spouse decrees,
Torn from thy arms, to sail a length of seas;
From realm to realm, a nation to explore
Who ne’er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Nor saw gay vessel storm the surgy plain,
A painted wonder, flying on the main:
An oar my hand must bear; a shepherd eyes
The unknown instrument with strange surprise,
And calls a corn-van; this upon the plain
I fix, and hail the monarch of the main;
Then bathe his altars with the mingled gore
Of victims vow’d, a ram, a bull, a boar;
Thence swift re-sailing to my native shores,
Due victims slay to all the ethereal powers.
Then Heaven decrees, in peace to end my days
And steal myself from life by slow decays!
Unknown to pain, in age resign my breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft of death;
To the dark grave retiring as to rest;
My people blessing, by my people bless’d.
Such future scenes the all-righteous powers display
By their dread seer, and such my future day.”

To whom thus firm of soul: “If ripe for death,
And full of days, thou gently yield thy breath;
While Heaven a kind release from ills foreshows,
Triumph, thou happy victor of thy woes?”

But Euryclea, with dispatchful care,
And sage Eurynome, the couch prepare;
Instant they bid the blazing torch display
Around the dome and artificial day;
Then to repose her steps the matron bends,
And to the queen Eurynome descends;
A torch she bears, to light with guiding fires
The royal pair; she guides them, and retires
The instant his fair spouse Ulysses led
To the chaste love-rites of the nuptial bed.

And now the blooming youths and sprightly fair
Cease the gay dance, and to their rest repair;
But in discourse the king and consort lay,
While the soft hours stole unperceived away;
Intent he hears Penelope disclose
A mournful story of domestic woes,
His servants’ insults, his invaded bed,
How his whole flocks and herds exhausted bled,
His generous wines dishonour’d shed in vain,
And the wild riots of the suitor-train.
The king alternate a dire tale relates,
Of wars, of triumphs, and disastrous fates;
All he unfolds; his listening spouse turns pale
With pleasing horror at the dreadful tale;
Sleepless devours each word; and hears how slain
Cicons on Cicons swell the ensanguined plain;
How to the land of Lote unbless’d he sails;
And images the rills and flowery vales!
How dash’d like dogs, his friends the Cyclops tore
(Not unrevenged), and quaff’d the spouting gore;
How the loud storms in prison bound, he sails
From friendly Aeolus with prosperous gales:
Yet fate withstands! a sudden tempest roars,
And whirls him groaning from his native shores:
How on the barbarous Laestrigonian coast,
By savage hands his fleet and friends lie lost;
How scarce himself survived: he paints the bower,
The spells of Circe, and her magic power;
His dreadful journey to the realms beneath,
To seek Tiresias in the vales of death;
How in the doleful mansions lie survey’d
His royal mother, pale Anticlea’s shade;
And friends in battle slain, heroic ghosts!
Then how, unharm’d, he pass’d the Syren-coasts,
The justling rocks where fierce Charybdis raves,
And howling Scylla whirls her thunderous waves,
The cave of death! How his companions slay
The oxen sacred to the god of day.
Till Jove in wrath the rattling tempest guides,
And whelms the offenders in the roaring tides:
How struggling through the surge he reach’d the shores
Of fair Ogygia and Calypso’s bowers;
Where the gay blooming nymph constrain’d his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
And promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe:
How saved from storms Phæacia’s coast he trod,
By great Alcinous honour’d as a god,
Who gave him last his country to behold,
With change of raiment, brass, and heaps of gold

He ended, sinking into sleep, and shares
A sweet forgetfulness of all his cares.

Soon as soft slumber eased the toils of day,
Minerva rushes through the aërial way,
And bids Aurora with her golden wheels
Flame from the ocean o’er the eastern hills;
Uprose Ulysses from the genial bed,
And thus with thought mature the monarch said:

“My queen, my consort! through a length of years
We drank the cup of sorrow mix’d with tears;
Thou, for thy lord; while me the immortal powers
Detain’d reluctant from my native shores.
Now, bless’d again by Heaven, the queen display,
And rule our palace with an equal sway.
Be it my care, by loans, or martial toils,
To throng my empty folds with gifts or spoils.
But now I haste to bless Laertes’ eyes
With sight of his Ulysses ere he dies;
The good old man, to wasting woes a prey,
Weeps a sad life in solitude away.
But hear, though wise! This morning shall unfold
The deathful scene, on heroes heroes roll’d.
Thou with thy maids within the palace stay,
From all the scene of tumult far away!”

He spoke, and sheathed in arms incessant flies
To wake his son, and bid his friends arise.
“To arms!” aloud he cries; his friends obey,
With glittering arms their manly limbs array,
And pass the city gate; Ulysses leads the way.
Now flames the rosy dawn, but Pallas shrouds
The latent warriors in a veil of clouds.




BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.


The souls of the suitors are conducted by Mercury to the infernal
shades. Ulysses in the country goes to the retirement of his father,
Laertes; he finds him busied in his garden all alone; the manner of his
discovery to him is beautifully described. They return together to his
lodge, and the king is acknowledged by Dolius and the servants. The
Ithacensians, led by Eupithes, the father of Antinous, rise against
Ulysses, who gives them battle in which Eupithes is killed by Laertes:
and the goddess Pallas makes a lasting peace between Ulysses and his
subjects, which concludes the Odyssey.


Cyllenius now to Pluto’s dreary reign
Conveys the dead, a lamentable train!
The golden wand, that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye,
That drives the ghosts to realms of night or day,
Points out the long uncomfortable way.
Trembling the spectres glide, and plaintive vent
Thin, hollow screams, along the deep descent.
As in the cavern of some rifted den,
Where flock nocturnal bats, and birds obscene;
Cluster’d they hang, till at some sudden shock
They move, and murmurs run through all the rock!
So cowering fled the sable heaps of ghosts,
And such a scream fill’d all the dismal coasts.
And now they reach’d the earth’s remotest ends,
And now the gates where evening Sol descends,
And Leucas’ rock, and Ocean’s utmost streams,
And now pervade the dusky land of dreams,
And rest at last, where souls unbodied dwell
In ever-flowing meads of asphodel.
The empty forms of men inhabit there,
Impassive semblance, images of air!
Naught else are all that shined on earth before:
Ajax and great Achilles are no more!
Yet still a master ghost, the rest he awed,
The rest adored him, towering as he trod;
Still at his side is Nestor’s son survey’d,
And loved Patroclus still attends his shade.

New as they were to that infernal shore,
The suitors stopp’d, and gazed the hero o’er.
When, moving slow, the regal form they view’d
Of great Atrides: him in pomp pursued
And solemn sadness through the gloom of hell,
The train of those who by AEgysthus fell:

“O mighty chief! (Pelides thus began)
Honour’d by Jove above the lot of man!
King of a hundred kings! to whom resign’d
The strongest, bravest, greatest of mankind
Comest thou the first, to view this dreary state?
And was the noblest, the first mark of Fate,
Condemn’d to pay the great arrear so soon,
The lot, which all lament, and none can shun!
Oh! better hadst thou sunk in Trojan ground,
With all thy full-blown honours cover’d round;
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record thy praise:
Thy praise eternal on the faithful stone
Had with transmissive glories graced thy son.
But heavier fates were destined to attend:
What man is happy, till he knows his end?”

“O son of Peleus! greater than mankind!
(Thus Agamemnon’s kingly shade rejoin’d)
Thrice happy thou, to press the martial plain
’Midst heaps of heroes in thy quarrel slain:
In clouds of smoke raised by the noble fray,
Great and terrific e’en in death you lay,
And deluges of blood flow’d round you every way.
Nor ceased the strife till Jove himself opposed,
And all in Tempests the dire evening closed.
Then to the fleet we bore thy honour’d load,
And decent on the funeral bed bestow’d;
Then unguents sweet and tepid streams we shed;
Tears flow’d from every eye, and o’er the dead
Each clipp’d the curling honours of his head.
Struck at the news, thy azure mother came,
The sea-green sisters waited on the dame:
A voice of loud lament through all the main
Was heard; and terror seized the Grecian train:
Back to their ships the frighted host had fled;
But Nestor spoke, they listen’d and obey’d
(From old experience Nestor’s counsel springs,
And long vicissitudes of human things):
‘Forbear your flight: fair Thetis from the main
To mourn Achilles leads her azure train.’
Around thee stand the daughters of the deep,
Robe thee in heavenly vests, and round thee weep:
Round thee, the Muses, with alternate strain,
In ever-consecrating verse, complain.
Each warlike Greek the moving music hears,
And iron-hearted heroes melt in tears.
Till seventeen nights and seventeen days return’d
All that was mortal or immortal mourn’d,
To flames we gave thee, the succeeding day,
And fatted sheep and sable oxen slay;
With oils and honey blazed the augmented fires,
And, like a god adorn’d, thy earthly part expires.
Unnumber’d warriors round the burning pile
Urge the fleet coursers or the racer’s toil;
Thick clouds of dust o’er all the circle rise,
And the mix’d clamour thunders in the skies.
Soon as absorb’d in all-embracing flame
Sunk what was mortal of thy mighty name,
We then collect thy snowy bones, and place
With wines and unguents in a golden vase
(The vase to Thetis Bacchus gave of old,
And Vulcan’s art enrich’d the sculptured gold).
There, we thy relics, great Achilles! blend
With dear Patroclus, thy departed friend:
In the same urn a separate space contains
Thy next beloved, Antilochus’ remains.
Now all the sons of warlike Greece surround
Thy destined tomb and cast a mighty mound;
High on the shore the growing hill we raise,
That wide the extended Hellespont surveys;
Where all, from age to age, who pass the coast,
May point Achilles’ tomb, and hail the mighty ghost.
Thetis herself to all our peers proclaims
Heroic prizes and exequial games;
The gods assented; and around thee lay
Rich spoils and gifts that blazed against the day.
Oft have I seen with solemn funeral games
Heroes and kings committed to the flames;
But strength of youth, or valour of the brave,
With nobler contest ne’er renown’d a grave.
Such were the games by azure Thetis given,
And such thy honours, O beloved of Heaven!
Dear to mankind thy fame survives, nor fades
Its bloom eternal in the Stygian shades.
But what to me avail my honours gone,
Successful toils, and battles bravely won?
Doom’d by stern Jove at home to end my life,
By cursed Ægysthus, and a faithless wife!”
Thus they: while Hermes o’er the dreary plain
Led the sad numbers by Ulysses slain.
On each majestic form they cast a view,
And timorous pass’d, and awfully withdrew.
But Agamemnon, through the gloomy shade,
His ancient host Amphimedon survey’d:
“Son of Melanthius! (he began) O say!
What cause compell’d so many, and so gay,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
Say, could one city yield a troop so fair?
Were all these partners of one native air?
Or did the rage of stormy Neptune sweep
Your lives at once, and whelm beneath the deep?
Did nightly thieves, or pirates’ cruel bands,
Drench with your blood your pillaged country’s sands?
Or well-defending some beleaguer’d wall,
Say,—for the public did ye greatly fall?
Inform thy guest: for such I was of yore
When our triumphant navies touch’d your shore;
Forced a long month the wintry seas to bear,
To move the great Ulysses to the war.”

“O king of men! I faithful shall relate
(Replied Amphimedon) our hapless fate.
Ulysses absent, our ambitious aim
With rival loves pursued his royal dame;
Her coy reserve, and prudence mix’d with pride,
Our common suit nor granted, nor denied;
But close with inward hate our deaths design’d;
Versed in all arts of wily womankind.
Her hand, laborious, in delusion spread
A spacious loom, and mix’d the various thread.
‘Ye peers (she cried) who press to gain my heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no more a part,
Yet a short space your rival suit suspend,
Till this funereal web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death:
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
Should he, long honour’d with supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter’s hand.’

“The fiction pleased, our generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue’s fair disguise.
The work she plied, but studious of delay,
Each following night reversed the toils of day.
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth, her maid reveal’d the amazing tale,
And show’d as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Forced she completes it; and before us lay
The mingled web, whose gold and silver ray
Display’d the radiance of the night and day.

“Just as she finished her illustrious toil,
Ill fortune led Ulysses to our isle.
Far in a lonely nook, beside the sea,
At an old swineherd’s rural lodge he lay:
Thither his son from sandy Pyle repairs,
And speedy lands, and secretly confers.
They plan our future ruin, and resort
Confederate to the city and the court.
First came the son; the father next succeeds,
Clad like a beggar, whom Eumaeus leads;
Propp’d on a staff, deform’d with age and care,
And hung with rags that flutter’d in the air.
Who could Ulysses in that form behold?
Scorn’d by the young, forgotten by the old,
Ill-used by all! to every wrong resigned,
Patient he suffered with a constant mind.
But when, arising in his wrath to obey
The will of Jove, he gave the vengeance way:
The scattered arms that hung around the dome
Careful he treasured in a private room;
Then to her suitors bade his queen propose
The archer’s strife, the source of future woes,
And omen of our death! In vain we drew
The twanging string, and tried the stubborn yew:
To none it yields but great Ulysses’ hands;
In vain we threat; Telemachus commands:
The bow he snatch’d, and in an instant bent;
Through every ring the victor arrow went.
Fierce on the threshold then in arms he stood;
Poured forth the darts that thirsted for our blood,
And frown’d before us, dreadful as a god!
First bleeds Antinous: thick the shafts resound,
And heaps on heaps the wretches strew the ground;
This way, and that, we turn, we fly, we fall;
Some god assisted, and unmann’d us all;
Ignoble cries precede the dying groans;
And battered brains and blood besmear the stones.

“Thus, great Atrides, thus Ulysses drove
The shades thou seest from yon fair realms above;
Our mangled bodies now deformed with gore,
Cold and neglected, spread the marble floor.
No friend to bathe our wounds, or tears to shed
O’er the pale corse! the honours of the dead.”

“Oh bless’d Ulysses! (thus the king express’d
His sudden rapture) in thy consort bless’d!
Not more thy wisdom than her virtue shined;
Not more thy patience than her constant mind.
Icarius’ daughter, glory of the past,
And model to the future age, shall last:
The gods, to honour her fair fame, shall rise
(Their great reward) a poet in her praise.
Not such, O Tyndarus! thy daughter’s deed,
By whose dire hand her king and husband bled;
Her shall the Muse to infamy prolong,
Example dread, and theme of tragic song!
The general sex shall suffer in her shame,
And e’en the best that bears a woman’s name.”

Thus in the regions of eternal shade
Conferr’d the mournful phantoms of the dead;
While from the town, Ulysses and his band
Pass’d to Laertes’ cultivated land.
The ground himself had purchased with his pain,
And labour made the rugged soil a plain,
There stood his mansion of the rural sort,
With useful buildings round the lowly court;
Where the few servants that divide his care
Took their laborious rest, and homely fare;
And one Sicilian matron, old and sage,
With constant duty tends his drooping age.

Here now arriving, to his rustic band
And martial son, Ulysses gave command:
“Enter the house, and of the bristly swine
Select the largest to the powers divine.
Alone, and unattended, let me try
If yet I share the old man’s memory:
If those dim eyes can yet Ulysses know
(Their light and dearest object long ago),
Now changed with time, with absence and with woe.”
Then to his train he gives his spear and shield;
The house they enter; and he seeks the field,
Through rows of shade, with various fruitage crown’d,
And labour’d scenes of richest verdure round.
Nor aged Dolius; nor his sons, were there,
Nor servants, absent on another care;
To search the woods for sets of flowery thorn,
Their orchard bounds to strengthen and adorn.

But all alone the hoary king he found;
His habit course, but warmly wrapp’d around;
His head, that bow’d with many a pensive care,
Fenced with a double cap of goatskin hair:
His buskins old, in former service torn,
But swell repair’d; and gloves against the thorn.
In this array the kingly gardener stood,
And clear’d a plant, encumber’d with its wood.

Beneath a neighbouring tree, the chief divine
Gazed o’er his sire, retracing every line,
The ruins of himself, now worn away
With age, yet still majestic in decay!
Sudden his eyes released their watery store;
The much-enduring man could bear no more.
Doubtful he stood, if instant to embrace
His aged limbs, to kiss his reverend face,
With eager transport to disclose the whole,
And pour at once the torrent of his soul.—
Not so: his judgment takes the winding way
Of question distant, and of soft essay;
More gentle methods on weak age employs:
And moves the sorrows to enhance the joys.
Then, to his sire with beating heart he moves,
And with a tender pleasantry reproves;
Who digging round the plant still hangs his bead,
Nor aught remits the work, while thus he said:

“Great is thy skill, O father! great thy toil,
Thy careful hand is stamp’d on all the soil,
Thy squadron’d vineyards well thy art declare,
The olive green, blue fig, and pendent pear;
And not one empty spot escapes thy care.
On every plant and tree thy cares are shown,
Nothing neglected, but thyself alone.
Forgive me, father, if this fault I blame;
Age so advanced, may some indulgence claim.
Not for thy sloth, I deem thy lord unkind:
Nor speaks thy form a mean or servile mind;
I read a monarch in that princely air,
The same thy aspect, if the same thy care;
Soft sleep, fair garments, and the joys of wine,
These are the rights of age, and should be thine.
Who then thy master, say? and whose the land
So dress’d and managed by thy skilful hand?
But chief, oh tell me! (what I question most)
Is this the far-famed Ithacensian coast?
For so reported the first man I view’d
(Some surly islander, of manners rude),
Nor farther conference vouchsafed to stay;
Heedless he whistled, and pursued his way.
But thou whom years have taught to understand,
Humanely hear, and answer my demand:
A friend I seek, a wise one and a brave:
Say, lives he yet, or moulders in the grave?
Time was (my fortunes then were at the best)
When at my house I lodged this foreign guest;
He said, from Ithaca’s fair isle he came,
And old Laertes was his father’s name.
To him, whatever to a guest is owed
I paid, and hospitable gifts bestow’d:
To him seven talents of pure ore I told,
Twelve cloaks, twelve vests, twelve tunics stiff with gold:
A bowl, that rich with polish’d silver flames,
And skill’d in female works, four lovely dames.”

At this the father, with a father’s fears
(His venerable eyes bedimm’d with tears):
“This is the land; but ah! thy gifts are lost,
For godless men, and rude possess the coast:
Sunk is the glory of this once-famed shore!
Thy ancient friend, O stranger, is no more!
Full recompense thy bounty else had borne:
For every good man yields a just return:
So civil rights demand; and who begins
The track of friendship, not pursuing, sins.
But tell me, stranger, be the truth confess’d,
What years have circled since thou saw’st that guest?
That hapless guest, alas! for ever gone!
Wretch that he was! and that I am! my son!
If ever man to misery was born,
’Twas his to suffer, and ’tis mine to mourn!
Far from his friends, and from his native reign,
He lies a prey to monsters of the main;
Or savage beasts his mangled relics tear,
Or screaming vultures scatter through the air:
Nor could his mother funeral unguents shed;
Nor wail’d his father o’er the untimely dead:
Nor his sad consort, on the mournful bier,
Seal’d his cold eyes, or dropp’d a tender tear!

“But, tell me who thou art? and what thy race?
Thy town, thy parents, and thy native place?
Or, if a merchant in pursuit of gain,
What port received thy vessel from the main?
Or comest thou single, or attend thy train?”

Then thus the son: “From Alybas I came,
My palace there; Eperitus my name
Not vulgar born: from Aphidas, the king
Of Polyphemon’s royal line, I spring.
Some adverse demon from Sicania bore
Our wandering course, and drove us on your shore;
Far from the town, an unfrequented bay
Relieved our wearied vessel from the sea.
Five years have circled since these eyes pursued
Ulysses parting through the sable flood:
Prosperous he sail’d, with dexter auguries,
And all the wing’d good omens of the skies.
Well hoped we then to meet on this fair shore,
Whom Heaven, alas! decreed to meet no more.”

Quick through the father’s heart these accents ran;
Grief seized at once, and wrapp’d up all the man:
Deep from his soul he sigh’d, and sorrowing spread
A cloud of ashes on his hoary head.
Trembling with agonies of strong delight
Stood the great son, heart-wounded with the sight:
He ran, he seized him with a strict embrace,
With thousand kisses wander’d o’er his face:
“I, I am he; O father, rise! behold
Thy son, with twenty winters now grown old;
Thy son, so long desired, so long detain’d,
Restored, and breathing in his native land:
These floods of sorrow, O my sire, restrain!
The vengeance is complete; the suitor train,
Stretch’d in our palace, by these hands lie slain.”

Amazed, Laertes: “Give some certain sign
(If such thou art) to manifest thee mine.”

“Lo here the wound (he cries) received of yore,
The scar indented by the tusky boar,
When, by thyself, and by Anticlea sent,
To old Autolycus’ realms I went.
Yet by another sign thy offspring know;
The several trees you gave me long ago,
While yet a child, these fields I loved to trace,
And trod thy footsteps with unequal pace;
To every plant in order as we came,
Well-pleased, you told its nature and its name,
Whate’er my childish fancy ask’d, bestow’d:
Twelve pear-trees, bowing with their pendent load,
And ten, that red with blushing apples glow’d;
Full fifty purple figs; and many a row
Of various vines that then began to blow,
A future vintage! when the Hours produce
Their latent buds, and Sol exalts the juice.”

Smit with the signs which all his doubts explain,
His heart within him melts; his knees sustain
Their feeble weight no more: his arms alone
Support him, round the loved Ulysses thrown;
He faints, he sinks, with mighty joys oppress’d:
Ulysses clasps him to his eager breast.
Soon as returning life regains its seat,
And his breath lengthens, and his pulses beat:
“Yes, I believe (he cries) almighty Jove!
Heaven rules us yet, and gods there are above.
’Tis so—the suitors for their wrongs have paid—
But what shall guard us, if the town invade?
If, while the news through every city flies,
All Ithaca and Cephalenia rise?”
To this Ulysses: “As the gods shall please
Be all the rest: and set thy soul at ease.
Haste to the cottage by this orchard’s side,
And take the banquet which our cares provide;
There wait thy faithful band of rural friends,
And there the young Telemachus attends.”

Thus, having said, they traced the garden o’er
And stooping entered at the lowly door.
The swains and young Telemachus they found.
The victim portion’d and the goblet crown’d.
The hoary king, his old Sicilian maid
Perfum’d and wash’d, and gorgeously arrayed.
Pallas attending gives his frame to shine
With awful port, and majesty divine;
His gazing son admires the godlike grace,
And air celestial dawning o’er his face.
“What god (he cried) my father’s form improves!
How high he treads and how enlarged he moves!”

“Oh! would to all the deathless powers on high,
Pallas and Jove, and him who gilds the sky!
(Replied the king elated with his praise)
My strength were still, as once in better days:
When the bold Cephalens the leaguer form’d.
And proud Nericus trembled as I storm’d.
Such were I now, not absent from your deed
When the last sun beheld the suitors bleed,
This arm had aided yours, this hand bestrown
Our shores with death, and push’d the slaughter on;
Nor had the sire been separate from the son.”

They communed thus; while homeward bent their way
The swains, fatigued with labours of the day:
Dolius, the first, the venerable man;
And next his sons, a long succeeding train.
For due refection to the bower they came,
Call’d by the careful old Sicilian dame,
Who nursed the children, and now tends the sire,
They see their lord, they gaze, and they admire.
On chairs and beds in order seated round,
They share the gladsome board; the roofs resound,
While thus Ulysses to his ancient friend:
“Forbear your wonder, and the feast attend:
The rites have waited long.” The chief commands
Their love in vain; old Dolius spreads his hands,
Springs to his master with a warm embrace,
And fastens kisses on his hands and face;
Then thus broke out: “O long, O daily mourn’d!
Beyond our hopes, and to our wish return’d!
Conducted sure by Heaven! for Heaven alone
Could work this wonder: welcome to thy own!
And joys and happiness attend thy throne!
Who knows thy bless’d, thy wish’d return? oh say,
To the chaste queen shall we the news convey?
Or hears she, and with blessings loads the day?”

“Dismiss that care, for to the royal bride
Already is it known” (the king replied,
And straight resumed his seat); while round him bows
Each faithful youth, and breathes out ardent vows:
Then all beneath their father take their place,
Rank’d by their ages, and the banquet grace.

Now flying Fame the swift report had spread
Through all the city, of the suitors dead,
In throngs they rise, and to the palace crowd;
Their sighs were many and the tumult loud.
Weeping they bear the mangled heaps of slain;
Inhume the natives in their native plain,
The rest in ships are wafted o’er the main.
Then sad in council all the seniors sate,
Frequent and full, assembled to debate:
Amid the circle first Eupithes rose,
Big was his eye with tears, his heart with woes:
The bold Antinous was his age’s pride,
The first who by Ulysses’ arrow died.
Down his wan cheek the trickling torrent ran,
As mixing words with sighs he thus began:

“Great deeds, O friends! this wondrous man has wrought,
And mighty blessings to his country brought!
With ships he parted, and a numerous train,
Those, and their ships, he buried in the main.
Now he returns, and first essays his hand
In the best blood of all his native land.
Haste, then, and ere to neighbouring Pyle he flies,
Or sacred Elis, to procure supplies;
Arise (or ye for ever fall), arise!
Shame to this age, and all that shall succeed!
If unrevenged your sons and brothers bleed.
Prove that we live, by vengeance on his head,
Or sink at once forgotten with the dead.”
Here ceased he, but indignant tears let fall
Spoke when he ceased: dumb sorrow touch’d them all.
When from the palace to the wondering throng
Sage Medon came, and Phemius came along
(Restless and early sleep’s soft bands they broke);
And Medon first the assembled chiefs bespoke;

“Hear me, ye peers and elders of the land,
Who deem this act the work of mortal hand;
As o’er the heaps of death Ulysses strode,
These eyes, these eyes beheld a present god,
Who now before him, now beside him stood,
Fought as he fought, and mark’d his way with blood:
In vain old Mentor’s form the god belied;
’Twas Heaven that struck, and Heaven was on his side.”

A sudden horror all the assembly shook,
When slowly rising, Halitherses spoke
(Reverend and wise, whose comprehensive view
At once the present and the future knew):
“Me too, ye fathers, hear! from you proceed
The ills ye mourn; your own the guilty deed.
Ye gave your sons, your lawless sons, the rein
(Oft warn’d by Mentor and myself in vain);
An absent hero’s bed they sought to soil,
An absent hero’s wealth they made their spoil;
Immoderate riot, and intemperate lust!
The offence was great, the punishment was just.
Weigh then my counsels in an equal scale,
Nor rush to ruin. Justice will prevail.”

His moderate words some better minds persuade:
They part, and join him: but the number stay’d.
They storm, they shout, with hasty frenzy fired,
And second all Eupithes’ rage inspired.
They case their limbs in brass; to arms they run;
The broad effulgence blazes in the sun.
Before the city, and in ample plain,
They meet: Eupithes heads the frantic train.
Fierce for his son, he breathes his threats in air;
Fate bears them not, and Death attends him there.

This pass’d on earth, while in the realms above
Minerva thus to cloud-compelling Jove!
“May I presume to search thy secret soul?
O Power Supreme, O Ruler of the whole!
Say, hast thou doom’d to this divided state
Or peaceful amity or stern debate?
Declare thy purpose, for thy will is fate.”

“Is not thy thought my own? (the god replies
Who rolls the thunder o’er the vaulted skies;)
Hath not long since thy knowing soul decreed
The chief’s return should make the guilty bleed.
’Tis done, and at thy will the Fates succeed.
Yet hear the issue: Since Ulysses’ hand
Has slain the suitors, Heaven shall bless the land.
None now the kindred of the unjust shall own;
Forgot the slaughter’d brother and the son:
Each future day increase of wealth shall bring,
And o’er the past Oblivion stretch her wing.
Long shall Ulysses in his empire rest,
His people blessing, by his people bless’d.
Let all be peace.”—He said, and gave the nod
That binds the Fates; the sanction of the god
And prompt to execute the eternal will,
Descended Pallas from the Olympian hill.

Now sat Ulysses at the rural feast
The rage of hunger and of thirst repress’d:
To watch the foe a trusty spy he sent:
A son of Dolius on the message went,
Stood in the way, and at a glance beheld
The foe approach, embattled on the field.
With backward step he hastens to the bower,
And tells the news. They arm with all their power.
Four friends alone Ulysses’ cause embrace,
And six were all the sons of Dolius’ race:
Old Dolius too his rusted arms put on;
And, still more old, in arms Laertes shone.
Trembling with warmth, the hoary heroes stand,
And brazen panoply invests the band.
The opening gates at once their war display:
Fierce they rush forth: Ulysses leads the way.
That moment joins them with celestial aid,
In Mentor’s form, the Jove-descended maid:
The suffering hero felt his patient breast
Swell with new joy, and thus his son address’d:

“Behold, Telemachus! (nor fear the sight,)
The brave embattled, the grim front of fight!
The valiant with the valiant must contend.
Shame not the line whence glorious you descend.
Wide o’er the world their martial fame was spread;
Regard thyself, the living and the dead.”

“Thy eyes, great father! on this battle cast,
Shall learn from me Penelope was chaste.”

So spoke Telemachus: the gallant boy
Good old Laertes heard with panting joy.
“And bless’d! thrice bless’d this happy day! (he cries,)
The day that shows me, ere I close my eyes,
A son and grandson of the Arcesian name
Strive for fair virtue, and contest for fame!”

Then thus Minerva in Laertes’ ear:
“Son of Arcesius, reverend warrior, hear!
Jove and Jove’s daughter first implore in prayer,
Then, whirling high, discharge thy lance in air.”
She said, infusing courage with the word.
Jove and Jove’s daughter then the chief implored,
And, whirling high, dismiss’d the lance in air.
Full at Eupithes drove the deathful spear:
The brass-cheek’d helmet opens to the wound;
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
Before the father and the conquering son
Heaps rush on heaps, they fight, they drop, they run
Now by the sword, and now the javelin, fall
The rebel race, and death had swallow’d all;
But from on high the blue-eyed virgin cried;
Her awful voice detain’d the headlong tide:
“Forbear, ye nations, your mad hands forbear
From mutual slaughter; Peace descends to spare.”
Fear shook the nations: at the voice divine
They drop their javelins, and their rage resign.
All scatter’d round their glittering weapons lie;
Some fall to earth, and some confusedly fly.
With dreadful shouts Ulysses pour’d along,
Swift as an eagle, as an eagle strong.
But Jove’s red arm the burning thunder aims:
Before Minerva shot the livid flames;
Blazing they fell, and at her feet expired;
Then stopped the goddess, trembled and retired.

“Descended from the gods! Ulysses, cease;
Offend not Jove: obey, and give the peace.”

So Pallas spoke: the mandate from above
The king obey’d. The virgin-seed of Jove,
In Mentor’s form, confirm’d the full accord,
And willing nations knew their lawful lord.



